Indonesian police arrest six over assassination plot during Jakarta unrest
Indonesian anti-riot police take their position to disperse the mob during an overnight-violent demonstration near by the Elections Oversight Body (Bawaslu) in Jakarta on May 22, 2019.
PHOTO: AFP
South China Morning Post
May 28, 2019
Indonesian police have arrested six suspects believed to be linked with a plan to assassinate four state officials and a prominent pollster as part of a broader plot to sow unrest ahead of last week's Jakarta riots that left eight people dead.
Five men and one woman had been detained on suspicion of accepting payments to carry out contract killings or supplying weapons, according to Indonesian police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal.
"The leader of the team received 150 million rupiah (S$14,400), while another suspect received 25 million from one person," Iqbal said on Monday, declining to disclose the names of the targets.
Iqbal said police also knew the identity of the person who ordered the assassination attempts, which had been set up in March and April. Several parts of the Indonesian capital had been photographed and mapped out for the plots, he added.
"But Allah still loves this country, and we were given a way to uncover this," Iqbal said.
The ringleader of the plan, referred to by police only as HS, had bought four firearms which he distributed to three other suspects, according to Iqbal. HS and three others are accused of carrying out the attempted killings, while the remaining two suspects are thought to have supplied the weapons.
All have been charged under a 1951 emergency law covering the possession and delivery of illegal firearms. They could face life imprisonment if convicted.
Last week, Jakarta was rocked by riots triggered by mass protests against the re-election of incumbent President Joko Widodo , who triumphed over rival Prabowo Subianto after securing 55.5 per cent of the vote.
Read also
Four shot dead by police in Indonesia as post-election riots spread
Prabowo has lodged a legal challenge against the result at Indonesia's Constitutional Court, alleging widespread fraud and claiming Widodo should have been disqualified. But independent observers have said the elections were generally free and fair.
Authorities on Monday also revealed that rioters had deliberately attacked a mobile brigade police hostel in the Petamburan area of Jakarta in an attempt to steal weapons.
Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said 50 officers had managed to secure the weapons and ammunition despite coming under sustained attack from hundreds of people throwing stones and petrol bombs.
One week on from the riots, security remains tight at a number of spots across the capital.
On Monday a small group of demonstrators turned up at Jakarta's iconic National Monument to protest against the police force's handling of the unrest.
A flier had been circulated on social media calling on people to rally in support of suggestions that Indonesian police chief Tito Karnavian be removed from his job, but the protest was cancelled due to insufficient turnout.
Over the weekend the headquarters of the mobile brigade police at Purwokerto in central Java was attacked in the early hours of Saturday by an unknown gunman carrying automatic firearms.
An officer was shot in the head and had to be rushed to hospital.
Central Java commander Tori Kristiyanto said the assailant had fired from a car at a police guard post at around 1.30am.
A day later a member of Prabowo's campaign team, Mustofa Nahrawardaya, was arrested for spreading false information about the riots on Twitter as well as racial and religious hate speech.
The politician from the National Mandate Party stood as a candidate in local legislative elections in Central Java this year but failed to win a seat in parliament. He is widely known for his activism on social media.
Read also
Nahrawardaya is also an administrator at Islamic NGO Muhammadiyah, where he is listed as the organiser of library information for its central leadership. He is a member of the organisation's broadcasting and public information division.
One of the eight who died in last week's rioting included a 15-year-old boy.
The chairman of the Indonesian Commission for the Protection of Children on Monday said religious teachers had last week directed youngsters to take part in the violence.
Susanto added that other children had simply been encouraged to join in by their peers.
The organisation has identified at least 52 children involved who had since been placed in a social rehabilitation hall in Jakarta.
"[The commission] appeals to all parties, including religious leaders, not to invite children to take part in any political activities," Susanto said.
Rusli Karim, a 15-year-old Jakarta high school student, said: "I joined the protest to defend Islam, to defend our nation from being ruled by a Muslim who never shows a willingness to protect or defend Islam."
Additional reporting by Reuters
This article was first published in South China Morning Post .
More about
Posted by Campaign and Advocacy With 0 Comment In Indonesia , News & Press
For Immediate release
Bangkok, Thailand
May 24, 2019
The Asian Network for Free Elections (ANFREL) condemns the recent rounds of violence on May 22 in Jakarta, Indonesia. ANFREL and its membership in the region call for all election stakeholders to exercise sobriety, especially in this period of reflection and contemplation for our Muslim brothers and sisters.  Most importantly, we call on all fronts to respect the rule of law and peacefully settle electoral disputes and differences judicially.
The unrest happened a day after the General Election Commission of Indonesia (KPU) announced that incumbent president Joko Widodo won the polls with around 85 million votes, beating former general Prabowo Subianto. Prabowo's camp alleged massive cheating and irregularities, thus refusing to concede defeat and expressing desires to contest the outcome of the elections in court. While lapses in electoral management have indeed occurred, including the death of more than 300 polling officers, credible analysts and monitoring groups are yet to report any proof which can discredit the integrity of the April 2019 polls.
According to authorities and news reports, the violence was instigated by 275 "paid provocateurs", who threw fireworks and rocks at the police, who then responded with teargas, rubber bullets and water cannons. The City Government of Jakarta relayed the sad news that there were 6 casualties on the first night of the riots, and 350 people were sent to hospitals due to severe wounds. Around 40,000 security forces were deployed in Jakarta, and access to social media was blocked to deescalate the situation.
ANFREL calls on all stakeholders to respect the democratic process and, more importantly, respect the will of the people to hold a peaceful and orderly election process. We also call on the civil society and the media to ensure that such process is monitored well, and that the people are given proper information. Finally, we call on all Indonesian election management bodies to maintain transparency and facilitate the fast resolution of all electoral disputes.
The organization regrets that a largely peaceful election process was tainted by the senseless violence which occurred.
Jokowi won vote count in Indonesian election: official result
Opposition has 72 hours to challenge result in constitutional court
SHOTARO TANI, Nikkei staff writer
May 21, 2019 04:32 JST
Indonesia's President Joko Widodo, left, hold as news conference with running mate Ma'ruf Amin after a quick count result during nationwide elections on April 17.   ©             Reuters
JAKARTA -- Indonesia's election commission has confirmed President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo took more votes than his opponent, former general Prabowo Subianto, in April's presidential election, opening the way for the incumbent to lead the country for the next five years.
Widodo's camp took 55.5% of votes cast, beating Prabowo for the second presidential race in a row, the General Elections Commission, or KPU, said early Tuesday. Prabowo's share came to 44.5%, according to the official results.
The announcement confirms the results of quick counts that showed Widodo securing around 55% of the vote.
The Subianto camp now has three days to challenge the official count in the constitutional court. His team has claimed the election was riddled with irregularities such as modified tallies, invalid voter lists and the burning of ballot papers by Widodo supporters.
Should he lodge a complaint, the court will be forced to look into evidence provided by the opposition and come up with a verdict before a late June deadline. He also contested the results of the July 2014 election, and it took the court another month to formally reject the claims.
Barring such an appeal, Widodo and his vice presidential pick, the influential Muslim cleric Ma'ruf Amin, will officially be confirmed the winner on Friday.
The constitutional court has the power to overrule the result and order a partial or full rerun of the election as needed. Regardless of its decision, the world's third-largest democracy will welcome its new president in October.
The Prabowo camp said in a statement last week that it will "reject the result of the KPU count of the votes" as there had been "countless acts of fraud in the election." But senior figures in the opposition have also said they will not dispute the results in the court as they view the process as a "waste of time," local media have reported.
Subianto and his supporters may take other steps such as taking to the streets to protest the official count. Security was stepped up around the election agency ahead of the announcement.
While the former general has been careful not to incite violence as that may land him in hot water, he has repeatedly called for "People Power" to protest against the interim vote count. Analysts warn this could lead to civil unrest similar to that in 1998, which led to the fall of dictator Suharto's autocratic regime, and a tense political standoff that lasts weeks.
Some opposition politicians have urged supporters to take steps such as not paying taxes in protest at the Jokowi administration.
Meanwhile, Indonesia's security apparatus continues to be on high alert after receiving intelligence of possible terrorist attacks in Jakarta during and after the release of the official counts.
As of Friday, national police had detained 29 people suspected of plotting strikes in May alone. All them were associated with Jamaah Ansharut Daulah, or JAD, the largest Indonesian pro-Islamic State cell.
"We call on the people not to go to the street in massive numbers because these groups are unpredictable," Muhammad Iqbal, spokesperson for the national police, said on Friday. "They are targeting the democracy event where large numbers of people gather. There should be no mass gathering... because it will be very prone to bomb and other kind of attacks."
Stay ahead with our exclusives on Asia
Sign up to our newsletters to get our best stories delivered straight to your inbox.
See Also
Search form
Search
AFP Indonesia
Published on Monday 27 May 2019 at 07:00
Two photos of a television report have been shared tens of thousands of times in multiple Facebook posts alongside a claim that they show Indonesian presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto received 63 per cent of the votes in Indonesia's 2019 presidential election. The claim is false; the figure highlighted as evidence for the claim in the misleading posts actually refers to 68,650,239 votes, not 63 per cent of the votes; Prabowo and his running mate Sandiaga Uno received 44.5 per cent of the votes according to Indonesia's General Elections Commission (KPU).
The photos were shared in this May 21, 2019, Facebook post. It has been shared more than 23,000 times.
The Indonesian language caption in the misleading Facebook posts translates to English as: "This is the evidence that 63 per cent of the votes were in favour of Prabowo! It then was quickly changed to 44 per cent! May God curse you".
Below is a screenshot of the post:
A screenshot of the misleading Facebook post
The photos show a television report featuring KPU chairman Arief Budiman announcing presidential Indonesia's election results on May 21. This is his official Twitter account.
This is an AFP report about the presidential election.
In both photos, Indonesian text in a blue box on the lower part of the screen translates to English as: "Announcement of the 2019 election results."
President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo faced Prabowo Subianto in the April election. They are listed as the presidential candidates on the official website of the General Elections Commission (KPU) here .
The same photos were shared with an identical claim on Facebook here .
The claim is false; the figure highlighted as evidence for the claim in the misleading posts refers to 68,650,239 votes, not 63 per cent of the votes; Prabowo and his running mate Sandiaga Uno received 44.5 per cent of the votes according to Indonesia's KPU.
The first image in the misleading posts includes a television banner which shows Prabowo and his running mate Sandiaga Uno got 68,650,239 votes, while Jokowi and his vice presidential candidate Ma'ruf Amin got 85,607,362 votes.
Below is a screenshot of the first photo:
A screenshot of the first photo in the misleading Facebook post
The second image in the misleading posts includes a television banner which shows Jokowi received 55.50 per cent of the votes, while Prabowo received 44.50 per cent.
Below is a screenshot of the second photo:
A screenshot of the second photo in the misleading Facebook post
The KPU announced on May 21, 2019, that the president had won the election.
This video on the KPU's official YouTube channel includes Arief Budiman's announcement. The final results are shown on screen at the 19 minute 39 second mark.
The same number of votes and percentage of votes for each candidate were also reported by Indonesian news site Kompas here and on BBC Indonesia here .​
Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
May 22, 2019
JAKARTA: Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
Indonesian police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated.
The national police chief has said the public should not assume police were responsible.
Social media has been restricted in some areas to stop rumours spreading.
National police chief Tito Karnavian denied that his officers had used live ammunition and called for calm.
"Some had gunshot wounds, some had blunt force wounds but we still need to clarify this," he said, referring to the six dead, who are believed to have been killed overnight on Tuesday.
The authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous".
They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
Protesters have been gathering again in the city on Wednesday.
Protests in the capital Jakarta started peacefully on Tuesday but soon turned violent, with cars set on fire and firecrackers thrown at police.
Police in riot gear fired tear gas to disperse the crowd.
The protests erupted after election results showed Mr Widodo had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto.
The country's General Election Commission confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Widodo had won the presidency, taking 55.5% of votes.
Mr Prabowo has rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission has dismissed his claims.
The ex-general also lost against Mr Widodo at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
More than 192 million people were eligible to vote in the presidential and general elections that took place on 17 April.
After the official results were announced on Tuesday, thousands gathered in front of the election supervisory building in support of Mr Prabowo, but later moved on to other areas across Jakarta after police urged the crowd to disperse, according to BBC Indonesian.
Local TV stations showed several standoffs between protesters and police in parts of the city.
More than 30,000 troops had been deployed in Jakarta in anticipation of potential violence.
Yesterday, chief security minister Wiranto, who uses just a single name, said access to social media would be blocked in some areas.
The restrictions – including on photo and video sharing – aimed to control the spread of misinformation, he said.
– BBC
Jakarta riots reveal Indonesia's deep divisions
Jakarta riots reveal Indonesia's deep divisions
Indonesia's post-election violence highlights the tension over the place of Islam in the democracy and what is now a deep rift in the country's politics
By Professor Tim Lindsey, University of Melbourne
Share selection to:
The violent riots that shook Jakarta last week led to at least six deaths , over 700 injured and more than 200 arrests.
Demonstrations and rallies are common in Indonesia, but street violence like this had not been seen since the fall of Soeharto in 1998.
Students protest Soeharto's regime in 1998. Picture: Getty Images
Protests began peacefully in front of the Elections Supervisory Agency (Bawaslu) on May 20, after the General Elections Commission (KPU) made the surprise decision to release its official count at 3am that morning.
By 9pm on Tuesday, rioters supporting the defeated presidential candidate, former general Prabowo Subianto, (including some apparently linked to Islamic State) were burning cars and buildings, and using rocks, petrol bombs and fireworks to attack police.
Security forces responded with tear gas, water cannons and rubber bullets. They claim not to have used real bullets, although families of at least two victims claim they died of bullet wounds and the National Police Hospital says autopsies show four died this way.
Read more
The violence was repeated the next night and spread beyond Jakarta, with incidents in East Java and Potianak (Kalimantan) as well. The government called in the army to help control the situation.
Obviously deeply concerned, it took the extraordinary step of slowing down the internet to obstruct the sharing of provocative material across social media sites.
Two nights later, the government seemed to have the situation under control.
On Friday, Prabowo's campaign lodged protests against the election results with the Constitutional Court. They argue that the convincing 10 per cent-plus margin of victory of his rival, President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo, was fraudulently obtained. To date, they have not been able to produce convincing evidence to back this up.
If, as likely, the court rejects the petition to annul Jokowi's win, that may well spark another round of rioting. This is particularly so because Prabowo's camp has been saying for weeks that the court is biased in favour of the government.
Supporters of the defeated presidential candidate, former general Prabowo Subianto, rioted in Jakarta. Picture: Getty Images
But even if the rioting starts up again, it is very unlikely to topple Jokowi, given the government, police and army seem to have closed ranks behind him.
Many members of the elite do not particularly like Jokowi, a provincial politician who made a spectacular leap to the presidency five years ago and remains somewhat of an outsider.
But he has the huge advantage of incumbency. Leaders of the bureaucracy and security forces owe their positions, wealth and power to his administration. They fear being replaced in the purge of senior positions that would follow if Prabowo somehow took over.
Read more
Even though Prabowo's fourth bid to become president seems doomed and Jokowi is doubtless confident of being sworn in on October 20, that does not mean Jokowi's second and final five-year term will be smooth sailing.
The riots seem to have fizzled out, but they are the product of tensions over the place of Islam in Indonesian life and what is now a deep cleavage in Indonesian politics.
To explain how this has happened, we need to go back to 2017 and the major crisis of Jokowi's first term: the prosecution and conviction for blasphemy of then Jakarta Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (known as Ahok, or BTP, as he now prefers).
Ahok had been the deputy governor under Jokowi and stepped up when Jokowi resigned to run for the presidency. An ethnic Chinese Christian governor was seen as unacceptable to hardline Islamists.
Jakarta Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (known as Ahok) was sentenced to two years in prison for blasphemy. Picture: Getty Images
They used comments about the Qur'an made by Ahok while campaigning for re-election to launch a massive and bitter populist campaign against him.
Hundreds of thousands took part in rallies that targeted Ahok and, eventually, his former friend and close colleague, Jokowi, at one stage even marching on the palace.
After Ahok's fall, some of the Muslim organisations that had formed the so-called " 212 movement " to tear him down began aggressively targeting Jokowi. In response, Jokowi has taken tough measures against them, including giving himself new powers to ban civil society groups. He also backed criminal charges against figures he saw as leading public criticism of his government.
Read more
As a result, the disgruntled Islamist conservatives who loathe Jokowi lined up behind Prabowo, the only alternative candidate.
This split meant that many members of the world's largest Muslim organisation, Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), which is generally more tolerant of religious difference, sided with Jokowi, particularly after he chose NU leader Ma'ruf Amin as his running mate.
The world's second-largest Muslim organisation, Muhammadiyah , traditionally NU's rival, was officially neutral. But many of its members clearly sided with Prabowo.
So did other, more conservative, Muslim organisations, such as the Islamist PKS party, and more extreme groups like the thuggish Islamic Defenders Front (FPI) – and, of course, the 212 alumni.
The result was a vicious social media campaign, full of trolling, hoaxes and conspiracy theories, fake news and online vilification. Rumours that Jokowi is a closet Christian from a communist family were circulated once again .
Rumours that Jokowi was a closet Christian from a communist family circulated during the election. Picture: Getty Images
The election thus polarised Indonesia, reviving old divisions in an atmosphere of renewed anxiety about ethnic and religious identity. Jokowi prevailed in Javanese communities linked to NU and in areas where non-Muslims are a majority or a large minority, like Papua, Bali, East Nusa Tenggara and North Sulawesi.
On the other hand, majority Muslim outer islands often associated with Muhammadiyah largely fell to Prabowo, such as West Sumatra. Likewise, Prabowo took back South Sulawesi, Southeast Sulawesi, Bengkulu and Jambi from Jokowi, who won them in 2014.
West Java tells the story. Although part of Java, it has never been a NU stronghold but is seen as historically a centre for Islamist conservatism. It went for Prabowo. Jakarta, urban and more urbane, but on the cusp of West Java, was split.
Read more
Divisions show no sign of healing
Prabowo's defeat does not spell the end of his supporters' aspirations for a less tolerant Indonesia that privileges their brand of Islam. The election's geopolitical polarisation is likely to be a continuing source of problems for Jokowi in the years ahead.
With NU in the vice-presidential office and very likely to continue its stranglehold on the Ministry of Religious Affairs, resentment from Muhammadiyah, PKS and others will be maintained. It will play out in conflicts in the legislature and in and around government.
The tough measures Jokowi's administration – obviously worried – deployed in recent weeks to try to head off the riots has only exacerbated the situation. Former general Wiranto, now coordinating minister for politics, law and security, ominously formed a team to investigate "unconstitutional behavior".
Prabowo's defeat does not spell the end of his supporters' aspirations. Picture: Getty Images
Twenty or so people linked to Prabowo, including two former generals, have been arrested on charges including treason and weapons smuggling.
At one stage a warrant was issued to bring Prabowo himself in for questioning (although this was quickly rescinded).
These measures reflect a wider trend towards so-called "soft authoritarianism" in Jokowi's administration, which has concerned many Indonesian and foreign observers.
It also feeds the narrative promoted by his Islamist opponents of a president willing to use the full force of the state to marginalise them, and that simply entrenches the battlelines.
Jokowi is a pragmatic politician who values stability and cohesion above most other things. Once the riots die down, Jokowi's instinct will be to "buy in" the Muslim right and Prabowo's core supporters.
He may do this by offering them positions in the incoming administration or access to resources. If that doesn't work, we can expect more trouble ahead.
This article was first published on The Conversation .
Banner: Getty Images
Indonesian President Joko Widodo, left, and his running mate Ma'ruf Amin wave to journalists after a press conference in Jakarta, Indonesia, Wednesday, April 17, 2019.
Image Credit: AP Photo/Achmad Ibrahim
Indonesia's Surprisingly Quiet Election
In an era of increased electoral polarization and agitation, what are the lessons of Indonesia's tame campaign?
By Nithin Coca for The Diplomat
April 23, 2019
 
 
Quiet. Boring. Stable. Just two years after a dramatic race ousted a minority governor, Indonesia's concurrent presidential and parliamentary elections were downright tame, a stark contrast to dramatic, highly contested – and sometimes vicious – elections that took place last month in Thailand and are ongoing in India. Nor was it anything like the fake news and hate-filled elections in the United States and the Philippines in recent years.
"The election was peaceful," says Patrick Ziegenhain, a Jakarta-based scholar and currently a visiting professor at Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia. "No tension, no mass demonstrations, no huge campaign activities. It was more peaceful than previous elections in 2017 and 2014."
Despite a long campaigning period, several debates, and numerous news stories, polls only shifted marginally over the past year. Pollster quick counts show incumbent Joko "Jokowi" Widodo leading by about 8-10 percentage points – larger than his margin in 2014. Campaigning was mostly normal and rallies were peaceful. Even disinformation played a marginal role, with a poll from Saiful Mujani released before the election showing that few hoaxes were resonating with Indonesian voters.
Enjoying this article? Click here to subscribe for full access. Just $5 a month.
While opposition candidate Prabowo Subianto seems bent on contesting the results, most of the country has responded with a yawn. Only about 1,000 people showed up at his South Jakarta home for a post-election speech, timed to take place after Friday prayers, a paltry figure for a city of 10 million. In public discourse, he is looking more and more like a sore loser, and there are even rumors that his running mate, Sandiaga Uno, is distancing himself from Prabowo, as many note his conspicuous absence or lack of enthusiasm at post-election events.
So why was Indonesia's election so tame, compared to both the 2017 Jakarta governor's race, when incumbent Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama "Ahok" was defeated in a campaign where fake news, viral memes, and derogatory religious and ethnic rhetoric played a key role, and even the 2014 presidential race? In an era where countries around the world are seeing increased polarization and agitation around campaigns, are there lessons from Indonesia's campaign? Part of it was the ability to learn from past experiences, both domestically and abroad, and be prepared.
"Overall there was far more preparation and security for this election than for the 2017 Jakarta Governor's race," said Joshua Kurlantzick, senior fellow for Southeast Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations. Beyond the passing of controversial laws that allowed for the banning of groups like the Hizbut Tahrir , which helped organize the 2017 anti-Ahok movement. The government also set up a fake news monitoring center to tackle misinformation, going as far as to arrest the creators of hoaxes, including one alleging that tampered ballots were coming in from China pre-selected for Jokowi, and the housewife creators of a video alleging that the incumbent would make gay marriage legal.
Credit should also be given to Jokowi, who has proven himself an adept campaigner. While he hasn't kept all of his 2014 promises, including, notably, his pledges to address human rights, he has made real progress on expanding the country's social welfare system, investing in infrastructure, and growing the economy. He has also been able to maintain his image as a clean everyman, and still takes impromptu public visits to markets, and recently rode a crowded train to and from work like any other commuter.
Many see his choice of Ma'ruf Amin, albeit with significant outside pressure, as a key factor in defusing the potential for an Islamic-based opposition candidacy. However, the initial polls show that his presence may have not had such a large impact, as Jokowi performed worse than 2014 in more conservative Muslim-majority provinces like Aceh, West Sumatra, and South Sumatra.
It may also be time to reassess the conventional wisdom of the Jakarta governor's race. At the time, some saw it as a sign that Indonesia was turning toward conservative Islam. Others noted that the race likely had to do as much with Ahok's Chinese ethnicity, and his unique personality and proneness for speaking his mind, than religion. It is looking increasingly likely that the anti-Ahok mobilizations were a unique moment, not the signs of a deeper trend.
In fact, there is a tendency to overly focus on religion, and in particular Islam, when analyzing Indonesian politics. Even in this election, which lacked 2017 style mass mobilizations, religion has already been deemed the deciding factor by many international media outlets. Look at the post-election headlines at the New York Times ("Faith Politics on the Rise as Indonesian Islam Takes a Hard-Line Path") or Reuters ("In Indonesia's election, the winner is Widodo – and Islam").
The reality is more complicated. Even in the conservative provinces that Jokowi lost, religion may not have been decisive. According to one source, Jokowi's advisers saw lower commodity prices for palm oil and rice as likely factors in his lower vote figures in agriculture-dominated provinces of Sumatra and Kalimantan. In Indonesia, the economy – as in most democracies – can trump religion at the polls. Moreover Prabowo, the supposedly Islamist candidate, often mentioned the fact that his maternal family is Christian, as are two of his siblings. Jokowi's pandering to Islam did not stop him from participating in Hindu festivities while campaigning in Bali.
The big question is if Jokowi will be any different during his second term than he was in his first. Comparing his record to Prabowo's – a former general with a widely documented record of human rights abuses – only makes him good in comparison.
"Jokowi is, marginally, a more effective guardian of Indonesian democracy than Prabowo," said Kurlantzick. But his record gives him, and others, pause. "There is the use of dubious laws to stifle free speech, the crackdown on some of his opponents... and he has not expressed much interest in really stopping the growing crackdown on minorities."
Few expect Jokowi, even without the shackles of having to prepare for re-election, to change much. He went out of his way, since 2014, to build ties with entrenched powers like the military, appointing traditional power-brokers such as former generals Wiranto and Luhut Binsar Pandjaitan to his cabinet, giving them power over critical portfolios.
"Jokowi will continue like the last five years, people will complain about human rights in Papua, or that the LGBT community is not being accepted, or of discrimination against minorities," said Ziegenhain. "This cannot be turned around in the next five years."
It is a lost opportunity for a young democracy. Hope for real reform may have to wait until 2024, when Jokowi's successor will be elected. As of right now, that race looks wide open. Jokowi does not have a designated successor, as Ma'ruf Amin will be 80 then, likely too old to run. The same can be said of Prabowo, who has now lost three elections as a presidential or vice presidential candidate and will be 72 in 2024. Many expect Sandiaga to take the mantle as leader of Prabowo's Gerindra party and become the leader of the opposition. While Sandiaga has issues, including allegations of corruption , and was the running mate of the tandem that used religion to take down Ahok in 2017, he's a fairly mainstream, pro-business politician, far from a polarizing Rodrigo Duterte, Donald Trump, or Narendra Modi figure. Whether another, outsider candidate emerges seemingly from nowhere, as Jokowi did in 2014, remains to be seen.
It is telling that an election that changed little and was noteworthy for its stability and continuity is seen as global success. Compare 2019 to the situation a little over 20 years ago, when Indonesia was undergoing a financial crisis and emerging from the three-decades long Suharto dictatorship, and the progress looks remarkable, in some ways astounding that democracy has survived. But take a more narrow lens and it's less clear how much the country has improved when it comes to openness, transparency, and inclusivity under Jokowi or his predecessor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
"It will take time for democracy in Indonesia to grow, but it's better under Jokowi than Prabowo," said Ziegenhain.
The most that can be said is that Indonesia has not seen its democracy deteriorate to the extent that Thailand, the Philippines, or India have. More of the same, or stability, is now seen as a mark or progress.
Nithin Coca is a freelance writer and journalist who focuses on cultural, economic, and environmental issues in developing countries. Follow him on Twitter @excinit .
Topics
6 Dead in Indonesia Post-Election Protest
A mass protest against Indonesia's presidential poll result turned violent – and deadly.
By Agoes Rudianto for The Diplomat
May 23, 2019
Religion, Ethnicity, and Indonesia's 2019 Presidential Election
Now that Joko Widodo has been certified as the victor in Indonesia's 2019 presidential elections, the question turns to what happened. While the current media focus is rightly on the post-election violence that wracked Jakarta last week and who is responsible for them, we also need to understand what drove the electoral results themselves. Several enterprising scholars of Indonesian politics have been scraping the election results from the Electoral Commission's website , and two of them— Seth Soderborg and Nick Kuipers —were kind enough to share the district-level results with me. Combined with the results from the 2014 presidential election, which Jokowi also won over Prabowo, we can examine how voters responded to the same presidential candidate in the context of increasingly prominent identity politics.
Where Did Jokowi Win Votes?
The first thing to look at is the difference in vote share for Jokowi-Amin (JA) in 2019 versus Jokowi-Kalla (JK) in 2014. The figure below arranges all districts from highest to lowest vote share for Jokowi in 2014, and then shows how results have changed from 2014 (gray) to 2019 (red). This is called a "dumbell plot" . The results, broken down by province, are revealing. ( Here is a large PDF version.)
The first two provinces in the figure, Aceh and Bali, tell most of the story. In the overwhelmingly Muslim province of Aceh, support for Jokowi collapsed, even relative to its modest base. In the predominantly Hindu province of Bali, by contrast, Jokowi's vote shares increased substantially. Similar patterns are visible in other largely Christian provinces like East Nusa Tenggara and North Sulawesi. This evidence is consistent with a hardening of a religious cleavage across the country: Prabowo's campaign appealed to Muslims, and Jokowi's to non-Muslims.
Some other details jump out when looking across provinces. Jokowi did well in 2014 in South Sulawesi, home of Vice President Jusuf Kalla . Kalla did not stand for reelection in 2019, and Jokowi's reversal in that province in 2019 is stark. Also apparent is the decline in support for Jokowi in Riau, the home province of Prabowo's 2019 vice presidential candidate Sandiaga Uno .
But the most important provinces to note are Central and East Java.[1] These are provinces with large Muslim majorities where Jokowi performed well in 2014, but he has performed even better in 2019. The obvious explanation is that these provinces, along with Yogyakarta, are overwhelmingly Javanese. Compare, for example, Jokowi's performance in East/Central Java to his performance in West Java, where Javanese are an ethnic minority. This correlation even holds within East Java: Jokowi fared worst in the districts on Madura , where Madurese are the majority ethnic group.[2]
Religious and Ethnic Cleavages
To visualize the relationship between religion and support for Jokowi more clearly, we can compare Jokowi votes share and each district's Muslim population share using demographic data available from IPUMS-International . Here is what that looks like, both in 2014 (left) and 2019 (right). The red lines are lowess fits that predict the relationship between the two variables.
Clearly, Muslim-minority districts have voted overwhelmingly for Jokowi. This is quite apparent in provinces like North Sumatra, where we observe a growing split between predominantly Christian districts that support Jokowi, and predominantly Muslim ones that supported Prabowo. It is also true in the otherwise heavily Muslim province of South Sulawesi, where the majority Catholic Torajan districts bucked the trend identified previously. But among Muslim-majority districts, there is wide variation in Jokowi support. This reflects the differences between Muslim Aceh and Muslim Java. Comparing both the spread around the lowess fit line for 2014 and 2019 and the increasingly steep fit in 2019, moreover, we discover that the relationship between religion and support for Jokowi is stronger in 2019 than it was in 2014. The correlation between Muslim population share and opposition to Jokowi also seems to repeat itself across Indonesia's regions.
Altogether, these patterns in the data are consistent with a growing cleavage between Muslims and non-Muslims alongside an ethnic cleavage between Javanese and non-Javanese.
We can further investigate the importance of the Javanese/non-Javanese cleavage by looking to the places where Jokowi's vote share increased relative to 2019. The next figure examines Jokowi's vote share in 2019 (left) and his increase in support (or "swing") from 2014 to 2019, comparing Javanese-majority districts versus all others.
Not only did Jokowi win in nearly every Javanese-majority district in 2019, he also improve on his 2014 performance in nearly every Javanese-majority district.
Identity versus Development
Do these patterns reflect something else besides religion and ethnic identity? Perhaps Jokowi also appealed more to poor, rural, or isolated voters in the economically lagging parts of the outer islands. And perhaps Prabowo's appeal lay with the relatively prosperous segments of Indonesian society, the urban middle classes in particular.  We need individual level voting behavior to test these hypotheses, and that is unfortunately not available. But we can nevertheless test whether these patterns appear in the aggregate data as ecological correlations by running a simple regression that predicts 2019 JA share as a function of 2014 JK share, total turnout (a coarse measure of district population), district-level demographic variables (% Muslim, % Javanese, and ethnic fractionalization calculated as ELF ), an index of average household material development, and an index of district urbanization, as well as province fixed effects (omitted from the presentation below). All of these data are available from IPUMS, as with the data on religion and ethnicity that I used above. To test whether the effect of Muslim population share varies by demographic or development indicators, additional models allow this variable to interact with these variables.
##  ## ============================================================================================================================== ##                                                                    2019 Jokowi-Amin vote share                                 ##                                     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ##                                            (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)        ## ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ## % Javanese                               0.206***            0.071           0.206***          0.221***          0.211***      ##                                          (0.025)            (0.167)           (0.024)           (0.026)           (0.026)      ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim                                -0.408***          -0.412***         -0.408***         -0.280*** -0.384***     ##                                          (0.047)            (0.045)           (0.047)           (0.043)           (0.043)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Ethnic Fractionalization                  -0.022            -0.018            -0.021            -0.033            -0.030       ##                                          (0.030)            (0.031)           (0.045)           (0.031)           (0.031)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Development                               -0.003            -0.002            -0.003             0.009            -0.009       ##                                          (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.007)      ##                                                                                                                                ## % Urban                                   -0.016            -0.015            -0.016             0.012           0.108***      ##                                          (0.016)            (0.017)           (0.016)           (0.021)           (0.021)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Turnout                                   -0.000            -0.000            -0.000            -0.000            -0.000       ##                                          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Jokowi Share 2014                        0.563***          0.563***          0.563***          0.567***          0.564***      ##                                          (0.093)            (0.093)           (0.093)           (0.095)           (0.095)      ##                                                                                                                                ## % Javanese * % Muslim                                        0.142                                                             ##                                                             (0.165)                                                            ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim * Ethnic Fractionalization                                           -0.002                                           ##                                                                               (0.062)                                          ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim * Development                                                                         -0.033**                        ##                                                                                                 (0.010)                        ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim * % Urban                                                                                               -0.136***     ##                                                                                                                   (0.010)      ##                                                                                                                                ## ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ## Observations                               490                490               490               490               490        ## Adjusted R2 0.923              0.923             0.923             0.925             0.925       ## ============================================================================================================================== ## Note:                                                                                            *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001 ##                                         OLS with province fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors clustered by province.
These results comprise fairly strong evidence that Jokowi did systematically better in 2019—net of his 2014 performance—the greater the Javanese population share, and worse the greater the Muslim population share. No other demographic or development variable appears to predict how well Jokowi performed.[3] There is also only limited evidence that the relationship between Muslim population share and Jokowi support differs substantially based on any other factors; see, for example, the marginal effects of Muslim population share across the range of district urbanization (plot is via interflex ).
The negative correlation between Muslim population share and Jokowi-Amin vote share in 2019 is higher in the most urbanized tercile of districts than in the least urbanized districts (p = 0.0271), but that is about all that we can conclude.
National versus Regional Factors
In analyzing district electoral results this way, the goal is to balance specificity and generality. In principle it could be possible to explain fully the pattern in results across Indonesia with reference to a small number of national factors. But reality will always be more complicated than that, with local and regional factors playing a role that will be nearly impossible to capture using a statistical approach such as this one.
As a final step in the analysis, we can return to the list of provinces above to see whether these differences can be fully explained with reference to religious and ethnic cleavages. To do so, I plot the province fixed effects from the first regression model, with Jakarta (where Jokowi and Prabowo performed about equally) as the baseline category. We can interpret these results as the difference by province in Jokowi's performance relative to Jakarta, and adjusting for the district characteristics listed above.
Accounting for religion helps to explain the results for provinces like Bali and East Nusa Tenggara, and accounting for ethnicity helps to explain the results for Yogyakarta, but even so there is more to explore in provinces like Aceh, Gorontalo, and West Sumatra. These are provinces where something more than Indonesia's emerging national cleavage structure of Muslim/non-Muslim and Javanese/non-Javanese is at play.
NOTES
[1] Some of the East Java data were taken from KawalPemilu due to problems with the original KPU site.
[2] I have no explanation for his relative success in Bangkalan, also a Madurese-majority district on Madura.
[3] In results not reported here, I've used a lasso regression approach to sort through all pairwise interactions of predictors in search of good predictors of JA vote share. The lasso selects Muslim population share as well as Javanese population share interacted with a range of other variables.
Share this:
Still, the protesters are a minority among the country's 193 million registered voters .
A hashtag condemning the violence, #TidakAtasNamaSaya, which translates to "Not in My Name", has gone viral on social media as moderate Indonesians speak out against the rioters.
And there is a clear distinction between those who came with violent intent, and those who rallied to pray and peacefully protest against the election result.
Photo: Ahmed Sudirwan was among those who took to the streets in protest after the election. (ABC News: David Lipson)
A journalist who said he used to work for the BBC, Ahmed Sudirwan, quit his job three days ago to take part in the rallies.
"I have come to this realisation, actually my conscience, that we Indonesians must stand up," he told the ABC.
"We are telling the world, we Indonesians are loving people but we know this is our country and we must stand up for our country."
He said he wasn't looking for trouble. But he also demonstrated a disconnect with the violent reality raging in his streets, claiming there had been "no violence" committed by the protesters.
When the ABC put to him that we had seen and filmed protesters throwing stones at police he claimed they were merely unknown "provocateurs".
"Provocateurs can be anyone. Don't ask us. Ask the policemen," he said.
The rumour that police were responsible for sparking these riots was just one of many that prompted authorities to limit the sharing of photos and videos on social media.
Jakarta on alert as protests after election loss turn violent
Indonesian police say situation turned ugly when some protesters refused to leave and began throwing Molotov cocktails.
22 May 2019 07:26 GMT
Police in Indonesia  fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse demonstrators in central Jakarta after supporters of losing presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto began setting fire to buildings and vehicles and pelted officers with rocks and burning objects.
Indonesian National Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said protests against the final results of last month's presidential election, which showed Prabowo losing to incumbent President Joko Widodo , turned violent late on Tuesday and continued into the early hours of Wednesday.
Police are investigating reports that at least one person was killed in the disturbances, but Dedi denied live rounds had been used.
"We are still checking, but I need to reiterate that police officers were not equipped with live bullets," he told reporters, according to the AFP news agency.
Local media on Wednesday reported six people had been killed, citing Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan who visited city hospitals in the morning. He said 200 people had been injured. The governor's office did not answer calls seeking comment from Al Jazeera, nor did the police spokesman.
Earlier, he said that dozens of people had been detained.
Kompas TV, an Indonesian news channel, showed protesters throwing rocks, facing off against hundreds of riot police in a neighbourhood in the centre of the capital.
Prabowo, a retired general who has been accused of human rights abuses, has claimed widespread cheating in the April 17 election but has provided no credible evidence to back up his allegations.
The legal director of his campaign team said on Tuesday that Prabowo would lodge a formal challenge to the result with the Constitutional Court.
Later on Wednesday, Indonesia's chief security minister said social media would be partially blocked to prevent the spread of hoaxes following the violence in Jakarta.
"To avoid provocations, the spread of fake news through the community, we will limit access to certain features on social media," said Wiranto, who uses one name.
Protesters clash with police in Jakarta, [Sigid Kurniawan/Antara Foto via Reuters]
Rising tension
Several thousand people on Tuesday took to the streets around the office of the General Elections Commission after the agency confirmed Widodo had won a second presidential term with 55.5 percent of the vote, compared with 44.5 percent for Prabowo.
Those protests ended peacefully, but the situation turned ugly when some demonstrators refused to leave the area.
190521053354338
Jakarta police responded when protesters threw rocks, Molotov cocktails and burning objects, spokesman Argo Yuwono said. Earlier, some people had set some stalls on fire.
Al Jazeera's Florence Looi, reporting from Jakarta, said the clashes went on for several hours, but the streets of the capital were largely calm on Wednesday morning.
Protesters were expected to return in the afternoon.
Prabowo has until Friday to lodge his appeal with the Constitutional Court. It then has 14 days from the time it receives all the evidence to make a decision.
"It's worth remembering that international observers have said the elections were largely free and fair, even though Prabowo alleges widespread cheating," Looi said.
"Some analysts have even said that because Widodo won by an 11 percentage point difference - which translates some 17 million votes - this undermines Prabowo and the opposition's argument that the elections were rigged."
More than 30,000 troops have been deployed across the capital amid reports of protests after the publication of the official election results.
Tensions have also increased since police said last week that they had arrested dozens of suspects linked to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL or ISIS) who had planned to cause chaos by bombing post-election demonstrations.
Additional reporting by Febriana Firdaus in Jakarta
SOURCE: Al Jazeera and news agencies
IndonesiaSecurity
May 27, 2019
Indonesian anti-riot police secure an area from protesters during a demonstration against Indonesia's President Joko Widodo's victory in the recent election in Jakarta on May 22, 2019. Photo: AFP/Bay Ismoyo
Post-mortem anatomy of Indonesia's deadly riots
Jakarta's May 22 riots, despite seven protester deaths, underscored both much improved police work and extremist risks ahead
ByJohn McBeth, Jakarta
Despite the apparent shooting deaths of seven demonstrators under still unexplained circumstances, Indonesia's much-maligned national police is receiving well-deserved praise for its disciplined handling of last week's election-related riots in Jakarta.
While that will do little to change the overall image of the 440,000-strong force as corrupt and inept, in specific areas such as crowd control and counterterrorism it has made significant strides as guardians of the country's internal security.
Improved crowd-control techniques, including the use of policewomen in frontline positions, have been taught at Indonesia's police academy since the early 2000s when the United States began focusing part of its aid program on that area of law enforcement.
The police, which unlike the military report directly to President Joko Widodo, have also benefited from new riot-control equipment, their own home-made pepper spray and an increased budget, which last year amounted to US$6.6 billion, compared with the military's $8.1 billion.
For some, the spectacle of two New Order-era generals, losing presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto and Widodo's chief political minister Wiranto, facing off against each other looked like a depressing rerun of the chaotic events that preceded president Suharto's fall from power.
A protester shows sharp bullets found in police cars after clashes over presidential election results turned into riots in Jakarta on May 22. Photo: AFP / Nurphoto/ Aditya Irawan
Certainly, the mysterious deaths of six rioters the night before the May 22 protest was a disturbing reminder of the sniper shooting of students at Trisakti University, which triggered the anti-Suharto riots that devastated Jakarta in May 1998.
Ominously, police reportedly recovered two M4 rifles fitted with silencers from the scene, weapons only carried by Indonesian special forces units, adding to concerns about a possible conspiracy.
But there were distinct differences from 20 years ago, even if Indonesia continues to be haunted by the authoritarian shadow of Suharto and dogged by many of the same figures from that era who have populated the political stage since his demise.
Wiranto's role this time was nominal, with government sources confirming that most of the security planning was left to police chief Tito Karnavian, a Western-educated officer well versed in modern policing methods and in counterterrorism operations.
It was Information Minister Rudiantara, however, who made the decision to shut down WhatsApp, Twitter and Facebook at a crucial juncture on May 22, apparently worried about the volume of fake news and messages exploding across social media.
Inadvertently, the censorship order may also have succeeded in preventing unidentified provocateurs in the crowd from communicating with one another or outside masterminds in efforts to escalate the violence.
Indonesian presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto speaks to supporters after the presidential election in Jakarta on April 19. Photo: AFP Forum via NurPhoto/Andrew Gal
After months of threatening a "people's power" uprising if the presidential election results didn't go his way, Prabowo sought to play peacemaker when the inevitable riots broke out and fears grew the situation could get out of hand.
If anything, the long-contrived crisis allowed security forces plenty of time to prepare, starting with the establishment of roadblocks to turn around busloads of pro-Prabowo supporters on the toll roads leading into the capital.
Paramilitary police and troops flew in from Sumatra and other parts of the country, including a full marine battalion airlifted aboard a fleet of seven C-130 transport aircraft from their base in the East Java port city of Surabaya.
Some took up positions out of sight in the basements of buildings along Jalan Thamrin, a main thoroughfare and the site of the General Election Supervisory Agency (Bawaslu), the main focus of the demonstrators, whose numbers didn't come remotely close to the promised hundreds of thousands.
Police have still to come up with an explanation of the circumstances surrounding the deaths of the six demonstrators after the fire-bombing of a police dormitory sparked street battles in the market district of Tanah Abang.
Police announced days beforehand that their men would not be carrying live rounds, but the rubber bullets they did have can still be lethal at short range. Only two of the victims have been identified and it is not clear what the autopsies have revealed.
Police say that among the 257 people detained were two alleged militants linked to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), bringing to 31 the number of terrorist suspects arrested in Jakarta and other parts of Java in the days beforehand.
Police in front of the Indonesia Election Supervisory Agency, the target of pro-Prabowo riots on May 22, 2019 in Jakarta. Photo: AFP / NurPhoto / Donal Husni
According to investigators, precursor explosive materials discovered during the raids were to be used in a bombing campaign against targets in other parts of the city, using the demonstrations as a convenient cover.
The day after the riots, Widodo dispatched Vice-President Jusuf Kalla to meet with Prabowo, who has now changed his mind and taken his election-fraud complaint to the Constitutional Court – as he did after his failed election bid five years ago.
The president's 11-percentage-point margin of victory this time, much wider than in 2014, gives the retired general's legal challenge little chance of succeeding, particularly if he is unable to provide a lot more compelling evidence that he has mustered so far.
Officials say the meeting was aimed at clearing the air, but Prabowo is looking increasingly like a sore loser, with his political allies in the National Mandate (PAN) and Justice and Prosperity (PKS) parties seemingly uninterested in taking things further.
Even the conservative 212 Movement and its hardline Islamic allies have been strangely quiet since the country's two mass Muslim organizations, Nahdlatul Ulama and Muhammadiyah, in effect banned their members from participating in the May 22 demonstrations.
But its campaign of creeping Islamization, aimed at turning secular Indonesia into an Islamic state, will almost certainly continue as security officials sweep up the ashes of the Jakarta riots and Widodo gears up for his second elected term.
Media playback is unsupported on your device
Media captionTear gas fired as Indonesia protest turns violent
Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies in Jakarta against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
Indonesian police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated.
The national police chief has denied his officers used live ammunition.
Police fired tear gas at protesters when clashes broke out again in the capital on Wednesday.
Protesters hurled fireworks and rocks at police during a stand-off near the election supervisory agency, while clashes also restarted in other areas of the city.
Social media has been restricted in some areas to stop rumours spreading.
The protests erupted after official election results showed Mr Widodo had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto at the polls last month.
How have the authorities responded?
National police chief Tito Karnavian said some of the six dead appeared to have gunshot wounds and others "blunt force wounds".
The authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous". They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
President Widodo has promised firm action against rioters.
"I open myself to anyone to work together to build and develop this nation, but I won't tolerate anyone who tries to disrupt public security, the democratic process or the unity of our... country," the president said at a press briefing.
How did the protests start?
Protests in the capital Jakarta  began peacefully on Tuesday but soon turned violent, with cars set on fire and firecrackers thrown at police.
Police in riot gear fired tear gas to disperse the crowd.
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Indonesian men jeer at police as protests continue in Jakarta on Wednesday
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Cars were found badly burned
The country's General Election Commission confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Widodo had won the presidency, taking 55.5% of votes.
Mr Prabowo rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission dismissed his claims.
The ex-general also lost against Mr Widodo at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
Did an election kill 500 people?
More than 192 million people were eligible to vote in the presidential and general elections that took place on 17 April.
After the official results were announced on Tuesday, thousands gathered in front of the election supervisory building in support of Mr Prabowo, but later moved on to other areas across Jakarta after police urged the crowd to disperse, according to BBC Indonesian.
Image copyright EPA
Image caption Protesters hurl missiles towards police during renewed clashes on Wednesday
Local TV stations showed several standoffs between protesters and police in parts of the city.
More than 30,000 troops had been deployed in Jakarta in anticipation of potential violence.
Mr Prabowo repeated calls for supporters to protest peacefully.
"We support people's constitutional rights [to protest] as long as they are civilised, peaceful and non-violent," he told reporters.
On Wednesday, chief security minister Wiranto, who uses just a single name, said access to social media would be blocked in some areas.
The restrictions - including on photo and video sharing - aimed to control the spread of misinformation, he said.
Related Topics
Media playback is unsupported on your device
Media captionTear gas fired as Indonesia protest turns violent
Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies in Jakarta against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
Indonesian police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated.
The national police chief has denied his officers used live ammunition.
Police fired tear gas at protesters when clashes broke out again in the capital on Wednesday.
Protesters hurled fireworks and rocks at police during a stand-off near the election supervisory agency, while clashes also restarted in other areas of the city.
Social media has been restricted in some areas to stop rumours spreading.
The protests erupted after official election results showed Mr Widodo had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto at the polls last month.
How have the authorities responded?
National police chief Tito Karnavian said some of the six dead appeared to have gunshot wounds and others "blunt force wounds".
The authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous". They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
President Widodo has promised firm action against rioters.
"I open myself to anyone to work together to build and develop this nation, but I won't tolerate anyone who tries to disrupt public security, the democratic process or the unity of our... country," the president said at a press briefing.
How did the protests start?
Protests in the capital Jakarta  began peacefully on Tuesday but soon turned violent, with cars set on fire and firecrackers thrown at police.
Police in riot gear fired tear gas to disperse the crowd.
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Indonesian men jeer at police as protests continue in Jakarta on Wednesday
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Cars were found badly burned
The country's General Election Commission confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Widodo had won the presidency, taking 55.5% of votes.
Mr Prabowo rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission dismissed his claims.
The ex-general also lost against Mr Widodo at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
Did an election kill 500 people?
More than 192 million people were eligible to vote in the presidential and general elections that took place on 17 April.
After the official results were announced on Tuesday, thousands gathered in front of the election supervisory building in support of Mr Prabowo, but later moved on to other areas across Jakarta after police urged the crowd to disperse, according to BBC Indonesian.
Image copyright EPA
Image caption Protesters hurl missiles towards police during renewed clashes on Wednesday
Local TV stations showed several standoffs between protesters and police in parts of the city.
More than 30,000 troops had been deployed in Jakarta in anticipation of potential violence.
Mr Prabowo repeated calls for supporters to protest peacefully.
"We support people's constitutional rights [to protest] as long as they are civilised, peaceful and non-violent," he told reporters.
On Wednesday, chief security minister Wiranto, who uses just a single name, said access to social media would be blocked in some areas.
The restrictions - including on photo and video sharing - aimed to control the spread of misinformation, he said.
Related Topics
We've detected unusual activity from your computer network
To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.
Why did this happen?
Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy .
Need Help?
For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.
Block reference ID:
Share via E-Mail
Bookmark
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said.
More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district.
Advertisement
Advertisement
The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name.
The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammad Aidi said.
Four soldiers guarding a nearby military post tried to control the protesters but were outnumbered, and one of the officers tried to control the mob by opening fire into the air, Aidi said.
"The mob became even more brutal and attacked the officer, in a such threatening situation another officer was forced to open fire and retreat to the post to save themselves," Aidi said in a statement Monday (May 27).
Advertisement
Advertisement
Four people, including the teenager, were shot dead while one more was injured and has been treated at a local hospital.
The military, local police and the human rights commission have formed a team to investigate the case, Aidi said.
Indonesia's presidential and legislative election also triggered a riot in the capital Jakarta.
Supporters of presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto have been protesting since the election result was announced last week in favour of incumbent president Joko Widodo.
Subianto's supporters claim the election was marred by rampant electoral fraud.
Since the rioting, more than 400 demonstrators have been arrested, according to police, who blamed the violence on "provocateurs" they claimed mixed with the crowd to stir up trouble.
Police said seven demonstrators have died but offered few details on how they died or who was responsible, though earlier said some had gunshot and blunt force wounds.
About 900 people were injured in the riots, according to the Jakarta Health Agency.
Source: AFP/nh
Indonesia police allege plot to kill top officials
by The Associated Press
Posted May 28, 2019 1:03 am PDT
JAKARTA, Indonesia — Indonesian police say four senior officials, including two Cabinet ministers and the national spy chief, were targeted for assassination as part of a plot possibly linked to last week's post-election riots.
National Police chief Tito Karnavian told a news conference Tuesday that details of the plot were obtained from interrogations of arrested rioters.
Seven people died in two nights of rioting last week in Jakarta after official election results confirmed that President Joko Widodo had won a second term. Police say the riots, which broke out during peaceful protests, were planned.
Karnavian said the officials targeted for assassination included top security minister Wiranto, who uses a single name, and his predecessor, Luhut Binsar Panjaitan, who is currently maritime minister.
The Associated Press
Jakarta governor says six dead in Indonesia post-election unrest
Published Wed, May 22 2019 1:55 AM EDT
Key Points
Six people died in civil unrest that gripped parts of Jakarta on Tuesday night after the election commission confirmed that President Joko Widodo won last month's election, the governor of the Indonesian capital said.
News agency Antara reported that a small number of protesters had attempted to storm a nearby police station and were using tables as barricades.
The General Election Commission (KPU) on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters in the April 17 election, which gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for former general Prabowo Subianto.
Police fired tear gas during a clash with protesters in Jakarta, Indonesia on Wednesday 22 May 2019.
Eko Siswono Toyudho | Anadolu Agency | Getty Images
Six people died in civil unrest that gripped parts of Jakarta on Tuesday night after the election commission confirmed that President Joko Widodo won last month's election, the governor of the Indonesian capital said.
Protests on Tuesday by supporters of Widodo's challenger for the presidency, former general Prabowo Subianto, started peacefully but turned violent in the evening, forcing police to fire tear gas to disperse the crowd.
"As per 9 o'clock this morning, there were 200 people hurt being brought to five hospitals," Governor Anies Baswedan told broadcaster TVOne. "The number of people dead was six."
He said hospitals were conducting post-mortems to determine the cause of the deaths.
Hundreds of protesters were still locked in a tense stand-off with police in central Jakarta on Wednesday after a night of violence. Television footage showed smoke billowing from behind dozens of protesters in streets of the Tanah Abang district, with some throwing firecrackers and tearing down public fences.
News agency Antara reported that a small number of protesters had attempted to storm a nearby police station and were using tables as barricades.
Several office buildings and embassies in downtown Jakarta were closed on Wednesday, as were train stations in the area.
A separate crowd in front of the election supervisory body threw rocks and firecrackers at police around dawn, and dozens of chanting protesters joined them during the morning.
Hundreds of police in riot gear blocked the usually busy Sarinah intersection to hold back a crowd they said was expected to swell further in the afternoon.
"We will keep going with these protests until he (Widodo) falls," said Afi Sikumbang, 58, a Prabowo supporter.
The General Election Commission (KPU) on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters in the April 17 election, which gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for Prabowo.
Widodo won more than 85 million votes of a total of 154 million cast in the world's third-largest democracy, but Prabowo told reporters he believed there had been widespread cheating.
The retired general pledged he would "continue to make legal efforts in line with the constitution to defend the mandate of the people", with his legal director stating the campaign planned to contest the result in the Constitutional Court.
On Monday, an election supervisory agency dismissed claims of systematic cheating, citing a lack of evidence. Independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Widodo was congratulated for winning the election by former president and Democratic Party chairman Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, who is part of the coalition backing Prabowo.
The National Mandate Party (PAN), which is also part of the Prabowo coalition, has also acknowledged the results of the election, which are being rejected by Prabowo's Great Indonesia Movement (Gerindra).
Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko told reporters on Wednesday he believed there was "a systematic effort by a certain group, outside of the terrorist group, that is riding on the situation to muddy the situation", adding that authorities have seized two pistols from people involved in riots.
"We know who is behind this, it is a matter of time," he said, adding that security was under control.
Escalation
Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo told Reuters on Wednesday that Indonesian police had arrested at least 20 people for provoking the riots and were checking on reports of casualties.
He stressed that security officers on the ground, which include military personnel, were not equipped with live bullets.
News website Tirto reported a man died of bullet wounds in Tanah Abang, quoting a doctor at a hospital near the site.
Indonesian authorities say 40,000 police and army personnel are on duty across Jakarta to maintain security.
Australia, the United States, and Britain issued travel advisories warning of an increased risk of violence across Indonesia and advising citizens to stay away from protests.
The Indonesian rupiah fell 0.2% on Wednesday. The main stock index gained as much as 0.3% earlier in the session but gave up its gains to trade 0.2% lower.
Related Tags
Six dead in post-election clashes in Indonesia | DW News - latest news and breaking stories | DW | 22.05.2019
We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.
Email
JAKARTA, Indonesia – Indonesian police say four senior officials, including two Cabinet ministers and the national spy chief, were targeted for assassination as part of a plot possibly linked to last week's post-election riots.
National Police chief Tito Karnavian told a news conference Tuesday that details of the plot were obtained from interrogations of arrested rioters.
Seven people died in two nights of rioting last week in Jakarta after official election results confirmed that President Joko Widodo had won a second term. Police say the riots, which broke out during peaceful protests, were planned.
Karnavian said the officials targeted for assassination included top security minister Wiranto, who uses a single name, and his predecessor, Luhut Binsar Panjaitan, who is currently maritime minister.
Trending in World
By subscribing with Google you will be billed at a price in your local currency.
MyFT – track the topics most important to you
FT Weekend – full access to the weekend content
Mobile & Tablet Apps – download to read on the go
Gift Article – share up to 10 articles a month with family, friends and colleagues
Read more
Indonesia: Post-election rally planned in Jakarta April 19 /update 3
Indonesia: Post-election rally planned in Jakarta April 19 /update 3
Presidential challenger Prabowo Subianto to hold post-election rally in Jakarta April 19; heightened security measures and transportation disruptions expected
18 Apr 09:48 PM UTC
TIMEFRAME expected from 4/18/2019, 12:00 AM until 4/20/2019, 11:59 PM (Asia/Jakarta). COUNTRY/REGION Jakarta
Warning Security Transportation Indonesia
Event
The campaign team of presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto is slated to hold a post-election rally in Jakarta on Friday, April 19, in support of Prabawo's presidential bid and to "celebrate" a peaceful election. The demonstration is set to begin at approximately 19:30 (local time),  following Friday prayers, at the National Monument . As of Thursday, April 17, Jakarta police officials indicated it had had not been informed of any planned demonstrations by the Prabowo team.
Heightened security measures and transportation disruptions are to be expected on Friday in central Jakarta. Clashes between rival political groups or with security forces cannot be ruled out.  
Context
The rally will follow the April 17 election in which incumbent President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo faced Gerindra party candidate Prabowo Subianto; early exit polls show Jokowi has a lead of 10 percentage points. The Prabowo camp subsequently disputed the results citing "widespread cheating" across the country and claimed the Gerindra party candidate won with 62 percent of the vote. Official results will be published in May. 
The Indonesian general elections on were held on April 17, during which voters cast their ballots to vote for president, vice president, and legislative representatives. Incumbent President Joko Widodo, also known as Jokowi, of the PDI-P faced challenger Gerindra party candidate Prabowo Subianto, a retired general who previously ran in 2014. Jokowi selected Nahdlatul Ulama leader Ma'ruf Amin as his running mate and Prabowo's vice presidential candidate is Jakarta Deputy Governor Sandiaga Uno.
Advice
Individuals in Jakarta are advised to monitor developments to the situation, anticipate heightened security measures and crowded conditions, avoid all public gatherings as a precaution, avoid discussing political topics in public or on social media, and adhere to all instructions issued by local authorities.
 
Copyright and Disclaimer
GardaWorld is the owner or licensee of all intellectual property rights in the material presented on this website. All such rights are reserved. The use of this website and its material is subject to the Terms of Use and accordingly you must not use any content from this website for commercial or other analogous purposes without our consent, including but not limited to any deep-linking or framing in order to copy, distribute, display or monitor any portion of the website. If you have any questions or are interested in distributing any content from this website, Contact us for more details.
Related news
Indonesia Post-Election National Survey 2014
Publication Date: 
Survey Charts-English (PDF)
The International Foundation for Electoral Systems (IFES) has been active in Indonesia since 1998. Through its national electoral surveys, IFES has provided previously unavailable data for all stakeholders to gauge the level of public preparedness for electoral participation and public perceptions of the electoral process. The most recent of these electoral surveys, conducted in June 2014 in partnership with the Lembaga Survei Institute (LSI) , captures the public opinion of Indonesian voters following the April 2014 legislative elections and leading up to the 2014 presidential elections. According to the survey, the majority of Indonesians profess satisfaction with the conduct of the April 2014 elections, while several findings from the survey point to areas which can still be strengthened toward a more effective and credible election process in Indonesia. Key findings from the survey include:
Survey Methodology
LSI conducted fieldwork for the survey from June 1 to 10, 2014. The base national sample for the survey consisted of 2,009 interviews in 33 provinces of Indonesia. Additional over-sample interviews were also conducted in selected provinces (Aceh, Maluku, Papua and West Papua). Information in this report is based on weighted data that is representative of the national population of Indonesia. The margin of error for the national sample is plus/minus 2.3%.
The electoral process of the April 9, 2009 legislative elections
• Eighty-two percent of Indonesians are very or somewhat satisfied with the overall voting process and procedures for the legislative elections.
• Eighty-eight percent say that the legislative elections were very or somewhat well-organized, and 80% rate the election as having been free and fair. A majority of Indonesians in all regions of the country hold these views.
• When asked to compare the organization of the 2014 legislative elections with the organization of the 2009 legislative elections, 31% say that the 2014 elections were better-organized and 52% say they had the same level of organization. Only 12% said that the 2014 elections were not as well organized.
Administration of the electoral process at the polling station level
• Seventy-eight percent of Indonesians surveyed rate the performance of polling station offices as "very good" or "good," while 78% have the same opinion of the village election committees.
• Forty-four percent of voters responding to the survey say that polling station officials did not check their Resident Identity Card (KTP) at the polling station and 75% say that their finger was not cleaned for ink residue before the ballot was cast.
• While most respondents think that election results are accurate, a significant percentage of Indonesians (26%) believe that manipulation of election results occurred at some polling stations in the country.
Dissemination of information on the electoral process
• Seventy-seven percent of voters are satisfied with the General Election Commission's (KPU) work in informing and educating voters about the election process, 74% are satisfied with its effort to ensure that election results are accurate and reflect how Indonesians voted, 74% are also satisfied with the KPU's work in compiling and establishing the voter's list, and 67% are satisfied with its ability to maintain independence from political pressures.
• Sixty-seven percent of Indonesians report that they saw voter information messages in the period leading up to the legislative elections.
• Forty-seven percent of Indonesians say that the KPU's materials were the most informative way for them to learn about the election process, and the survey finds that 74% of Indonesians saw at least one of the messages that the KPU produced to inform voters about the election process.
• Only 20% of regular users of the internet say that they used the KPU website and only 10% say that they received information from social media.
The role of money in the electoral process
• When asked to compare the prevalence of money politics in the 2014 election compared to the 2009 election, 34% of Indonesians say that money politics was more prevalent in the 2014 election than in 2009, and only 10% take the opposite view.
• Despite the fact that survey respondents are often reluctant to report taking part in activities that may be illegal or unethical, 15% of Indonesians say that they were offered money or other rewards in exchange for their votes during the legislative election campaign, and 5% report that someone they know was offered a reward. Twenty-nine percent of Indonesians report that a legislative candidate built facilities, repaired roads, or paid for other services for their community in the lead-up to the legislative elections.
Participation of women as candidates in elections in Indonesia
• Of the Indonesians who report voting for candidates in legislative races in the April elections, only 9% report voting for a woman in the House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat, DPR) election, 9% in the DPR Provinsi election, 12% in the DPR Kabupaten/Kota election, and 14% in the Regional Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Daerah, DPD) election. 
Preferences for candidates or parties  
• In the DPR election, 45% report voting for candidates only compared to 27% who voted for parties only, and 23% who voted for both the party and a candidate from the same party. In the case of the provincial DPR, nearly half (48%) voted for a candidate only, 24% for party only, and 21% for a party and candidate from same party. In the case of the DPR Kabupaten/Kota, these figures were 52%, 17%, and 23%, respectively.  
While identifying possible areas for improvement such as the training of polling station officials, the effectiveness of websites and social media as vehicles for voter-information dissemination, and societal resistance to voting for women, this survey suggests that, overall, Indonesians have positive assessments of the 2014 legislative election process. The KPU and electoral bodies at all levels of the electoral process are also rated positively by Indonesian voters for their performance during the legislative elections.
Downloads
You are using an older browser version. Please use a supported version for the best MSN experience.
Indonesia plunges into post-election unrest
By By Dave Lucas, Reuters of Reuters |
< PREVIOUS SLIDE SLIDE 1 of 30 NEXT SLIDE >
Protesters clash with the police downtown in Thamrin, Jakarta, Indonesia. Antara Foto/Muhammad Adimaja/via REUTERS
© Thomson Reuters, LLC

Asia Pacific |Indonesia Police Allege Plot to Kill Top Officials
Advertisement
Indonesia Police Allege Plot to Kill Top Officials
By The Associated Press
May 28, 2019
JAKARTA, Indonesia — Four top Indonesian officials, including two Cabinet ministers and the national spy chief, were targeted for assassination as part of a plot possibly linked to last week's election riots, police said Tuesday.
National police chief Tito Karnavian told reporters that details of the plot were obtained from interrogations of six arrested individuals.
Seven people died in two nights of rioting last week in Jakarta after official election results confirmed that President Joko Widodo had won a second term. Police say the riots, which broke out during peaceful protests by supporters of the losing candidate Prabowo Subianto, were planned.
The rioting followed an election that highlighted Muslim-majority Indonesia's religious divides. Subianto, who allied himself with groups that want Islamic law to replace secular government, won heavily in conservative provinces but was defeated nationally by Widodo's coalition of moderate and minority voters.
Karnavian said the officials targeted for assassination included top security minister Wiranto, who uses a single name, and his predecessor, Luhut Binsar Panjaitan, who is currently maritime minister and seen as close to Widodo.
The two others were National Intelligence Agency chief Budi Gunawan and the head of the presidential special staff for intelligence and security, Gories Mere. A fifth person, the head of an opinion polling company, was also a target, Karnavian said, without naming the person.
"We have arrested all the perpetrators who were ordered to carry out the executions, we have also confiscated four weapons, and we are developing the mastermind who gave the order to them who will be legally processed shortly," Karnavian said at a joint news conference with Wiranto.
The security minister said the assassination plot aimed to instill fear in the officials and weaken the government.
Subianto, a former special forces general linked to past human rights abuses in Indonesia, has refused to accept results of the April 17 election. He has alleged massive fraud but provided no convincing evidence. His campaign team filed a legal challenge to the result at the Constitutional Court on Friday.
Separately, local media reported that an American man who is a longtime resident of Indonesia has been arrested for spreading hoaxes online. In a YouTube video, the man says he's a Subianto supporter and claims communists are infiltrating Indonesian society, a frequent allegation of hard-line Widodo critics.
On Monday, national police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal said police had seized two bullet-proof vests with "Police" written on them, imitating official police gear, a rifle modified to hold a scope, along with two guns similar to those issued by the Indonesian military.
Iqbal said the six suspects are from a different group than the alleged militants arrested earlier in the month.
Before election results were announced on May 21, counterterrorism police arrested more than 30 suspected militants from Jamaah Ansharut Daulah, an Indonesian extremist group affiliated with the Islamic State group.
Iqbal said one of the six suspects was arrested at a hotel in Jakarta after participating in the riots, another was arrested at Jakarta's airport and others in locations around Jakarta and nearby Bogor.
Advertisement
Search for:
Indonesian protesters disperse after second night of post-election unrest
Riot police officers guard during a riot near the Election Supervisory Agency (Bawaslu) headquarters in Jakarta, Indonesia, May 22, 2019. REUTERS/Willy Kurniawan
May 23, 2019
By Maikel Jefriando and Wilda Asmarini
JAKARTA (Reuters) – Calm returned to the streets of the Indonesian capital on Thursday after a second night of clashes between security forces and protesters angry about the outcome of last month's election, which handed President Joko Widodo a second term.
Downtown areas of Jakarta became a battlefield overnight, with police firing tear gas and rubber bullets and protesters throwing rocks and firecrackers.
Protesters also tore up pavement slabs, destroyed street signs and set ablaze food stalls and a security post.
The unrest followed Tuesday's announcement by the General Election Commission confirming that Widodo had beaten his challenger, former general Prabowo Subianto, in the April 17 poll.
The violence began on Tuesday night with six killed, and two more killed on Wednesday night, officials said.
Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan said the dead included three teenagers, and 737 people were injured in the rioting, mostly  in the central neighborhood of Tanah Abang.
But the ranks of protesters thinned over Wednesday night and police spokesman Dedi Praseyto said the last dispersed by 7 a.m.
Roads quiet on Wednesday as office workers stayed away from the city center were busy with traffic again on Thursday. City workers in orange overalls swept up debris.
Widodo won more than 85 million of the 154 million votes cast but Prabowo has alleged "massive cheating and irregularities" and refused to concede defeat.
The election agency has said there was no evidence of systematic cheating and independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Elsewhere, a mob burnt a police station on Madura island, northeast of the main island of Java, while two police posts were set ablaze in Pontianak on Borneo island, media said.
'BENT ON CHAOS'
Financial markets were firmer on Thursday with the rupiah up 0.5% and the main stock index up 1.6%.
Taye Shim, director of capital markets at Mirae Asset Securities Indonesia, said he did not see the demonstrations as a serious threat to Indonesia's stability.
"While upset supporters might demonstrate their disagreement with the official election results, we don't think it would be a serious threat to Indonesia's democracy," he told Reuters.
Police said the number of arrests over the riots reached 300.
National police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal told reporters at least two men detained during the riots belonged to Garis, a militant group that had pledged support for Islamic State.
"They intended to carry out jihad during May 21 and 22 protests," Iqbal said.
On Wednesday he said officers had found some of the people they searched were carrying envelopes containing money, suggesting instigators behind the trouble.
"This is not a spontaneous incident, this is something by design," he told reporters. "There are indications that the mobs are paid and bent on causing chaos."
In a video on his Twitter account late on Wednesday, Prabowo urged his supporters to disperse peacefully.
"I beg you to return to your homes to rest, avoid any actions that would break the law," he said.
Prabowo's political party, Gerindra, complained that the authorities were trying to pin the blame for the riots on him.
LEGAL CHALLENGE
Gerindra spokesman Andre Rosiade said a lawsuit would be filed at the Constitutional Court on Friday over the election result, which gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for his challenger.
Prabowo lost the 2014 presidential election to Widodo by a slimmer margin and had objected to that result, lodging a complaint with the Constitutional Court that was rejected.
Analysts say Widodo's double-digit victory margin deprives the opposition of a strong case to claim rigging but it may be able to count on agitation by a strong contingent of Islamist supporters.
The government boosted the numbers of security forces to 58,000 across Jakarta and put temporary blocks on some social media to prevent unrest sparked by fake news.
Police paraded suspects in orange jumpsuits besides displaying weapons and cash at a news conference.
Police chief Tito Karnavian showed reporters a sniper rifle and two pistols he said had been seized days before the rioting.
"There is an effort to provoke, to create martyrs, blame the authorities and invoke public anger," he said.
(Additional reporting by Cindy Silviana, Bernadette Christina Munthe, Gayatri Suroyo, Kanupriya Kapoor, Fransiska Nangoy and Fanny Potkin; Writing by John Chalmers and Ed Davies; Editing by Robert Birsel and Clarence Fernandez)
﻿
Home  "  Website  "  International  "  Indonesia: 6 Killed, 200 Injured In Post-Election Protests Against President Joko Widodo's Re-Election
Indonesia: 6 Killed, 200 Injured In Post-Election Protests Against President Joko Widodo's Re-Election
The government had deployed some 50,000 police and soldiers in Jakarta, in anticipation of protests following the official election results.
A
increase text size
Outlook Web Bureau May 22, 2019 00:00 IST Indonesia: 6 Killed, 200 Injured In Post-Election Protests Against President Joko Widodo's Re-Election
outlookindia.com
2019-05-22T17:39:07+0530
At least six people were killed and 200 others injured during protests in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta, against the re-election of President Joko Widodo for a second five-year term, authorities confirmed on Wednesday.
The police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated, the BBC reported.
In the protests that began peacefully on Tuesday night after election results showed, that the incumbent President had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto, soon turned violent, after demonstrators who had gathered outside the headquarters of the Elections Supervisory Agency and the General Election Commission, burned several vehicles after the police tried to disperse them with tear gas.
Some 32,000 officers are guarding the headquarters of the two election bodies, with barbed wire and riot vehicles ahead of more potential protests on Wednesday.
The rioting in Jakarta was planned and not spontaneous, according to police.
Officers found an ambulance filled with stones and some of the dozens of people arrested had envelopes of money, said national police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal. Many of those arrested and come from outside Jakarta, he said.
The government had deployed some 50,000 police and soldiers in Jakarta, in anticipation of protests following the official election results.
Many residents have left the city, and parts of the downtown are closed to traffic with the election supervisory agency and Election Commission barricaded with razor wire.
National police chief, Tito Karnavian denied that his officers had used live ammunition and called for calm.
"Some had gunshot wounds, some had blunt force wounds, but we still need to clarify this," he said, referring to the six dead, who are believed to have been killed overnight on Tuesday.
Authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous". They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
The General Election Commission confirmed earlier on Tuesday, that Joko had won the presidency, taking 55.5 per cent of votes, that were cast during the April 14 polls.
Prabowo has rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission has dismissed his claims, reports the BBC.
The former general also lost against Joko at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
Rudiantara, the communications and information technology minister, said features of social media including Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp will be restricted on a temporary basis to prevent the spread of hoaxes and inflammatory content.
He said messaging systems will still work for text and voice messages but photos and videos will be blocked or slowed.
Authorities have also warned of possible terror attacks and have arrested dozens of radicals who were allegedly planning attacks during the demonstrations.
(With inputs from agencies)
Galleries
Camera Icon
Indonesian anti-riot police shoot tear gas to disperse protesters during a demonstration against Indonesia's President Joko Widodo's victory.Picture: AFP
Indonesian police fire tear gas to disperse protesters after President Joko Widodo re-elected
AFPNews Corp Australia Network
Home Events Indonesia: Post election outlook
Following the Indonesian general election on 17 April 2019, this seminar will look at the ramifications for the legal, economic and political landscape over the next five years.
May 25, 2019 /  8:26 AM / 3 days ago
Indonesia lifts social media curbs targeting hoaxes during unrest
Agustinus Beo Da Costa
2 Min Read
JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesia on Saturday lifted temporary social media  restrictions that were imposed to stop online hoaxes during violence around the announcement of official election results.
Communications Ministry official Semuel Abrijani Pangerapan  told a news conference that social media had returned to normal.
The restrictions came into force on Wednesday after rioting broke out in the Indonesian capital following protests against the victory of President Joko Widodo in last month's election.
Eight people were killed and more than 900 hurt when   rallies by supporters of defeated presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto descended into violence with police firing tear gas and rubber bullets as well as using water canon to quell unrest.
Retired general Prabowo has alleged the election was rigged. The election supervisory agency has said there was no evidence of systematic cheating and independent observers have said the poll was free and fair
Authorities have blamed a rise in online hoaxes, some calling for violent post-election attacks, for inflaming tensions and brought in social media restrictions in order to prevent "provocations".
The move imposed limits on the ability to upload videos or photos on social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and its platforms Instagram and Whatsapp.
The curbs had been criticized by opposition figures as being authoritarian.
Pangerapan said the government planned to tighten existing regulations to combat online hoaxes.
"We will make it an obligation for all social media platforms to actively remove hoaxes and fake news," he said.
At the same news conference, police said that a video that has gone viral showing police beating a man in Jakarta during the unrest was genuine, but said claims that he had died were false and said he had been arrested for helping instigate riots.
Writing by Ed Davies; Editing by Nick Macfie
Southeast Asia
Indonesia election: Prabowo disputes quick count results to claim victory over Jokowi
While independent pollsters suggest incumbent president Joko Widodo is leading his challenger by 8 to 9 percentage points, Prabowo Subianto says he has won 62 per cent of the vote
Jokowi has not acknowledged his likely win, instead telling supporters to be patient and wait for official results
Indonesia election: Joko Widodo's latest challenge may come from people refusing to vote
Sign in/up
Politics
Indonesian election: What to expect in Joko Widodo's second presidential term
Joko Widodo has indicated he will focus on human development in his second and final five years as president
He is also likely to continue launching more infrastructure projects, including joint ventures with China
Indonesia election: why Prabowo Subianto is maintaining victory despite a likely win for Jokowi
Sign in/up
Indonesia In 2019 - Coping With A Post-Election Year
Date:
Thursday, May 16, 2019 I 8:00 AM - 12:00 PM
Locatoin:
Summary Agenda Speakers Venue
2019 is going to be a defining year for Indonesia. Post-election, how will the economic outlook, political landscape and credit overview of the various sectors in Indonesia look?
Join S&P Global Ratings and S&P Global Market Intelligence for a morning seminar where our analysts and guest speakers will be sharing deeper insights and analysis on the credit overview.
Mr. Matthew Batrouney, Head of South & South-East Asia, S&P Global Ratings
9:05 am
Mr. Vincent Conti, Economist, Southeast Asia, S&P Global Ratings
9:30 am
Mr. Andrew Wood, Director, Sovereign & International Public Finance Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
9:45 am
Mr. Ivan Tan, Director, Financial Institutions Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
10:00 am
Mr. Xavier Jean, Senior Director, Corporates Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
10:15 am
Indonesia Credit Risk Trends In 2019, Pre-and Post-Election
Mr. Paul Bishop, Director, Credit Risk Solutions, S&P Global Market Intelligence
10:35 am
Panel Discussion: Indonesia In 2019 - Coping With A Post-Election Year Panelists TBC
11:15 am
Paul Bishop S&P Global Market Intelligence
Paul Bishop Director, Credit Analytics, S&P Global Market Intelligence
Paul Bishop is the Product Lead for Credit Analytics in S&P Global Market Intelligence's Asia Pacific Risk Services team, based in Singapore.  Full Bio
Paul Bishop is the Product Lead for Credit Analytics in S&P Global Market Intelligence's Asia Pacific Risk Services team, based in Singapore. He is responsible for Credit Analytics Product business across Asia Pacific. Paul has experience as a product manager in the credit and counterparty risk space and was previously Product Manager - Ratings & Credit Content in EMEA, based in London. Prior to this Paul focused on EMEA product strategy covering Investment & Commercial Banks, Private Equity and Credit Markets.
Paul joined S&P Global Market Intelligence in 2011 in London, UK. Paul holds a BA (Hons) in Political Science & International Relations from the University of Birmingham and a CFA IMC.  Minimize
Xavier Jean S&P Global Ratings
Xavier Jean Senior Director, Corporate Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
Xavier joined S&P Global Ratings in 2004. Based in Singapore since 2010, Xavier is the lead analyst for companies in Malaysia and Indonesia.  Full Bio
Xavier joined S&P Global Ratings in 2004. Based in Singapore since 2010, Xavier is the lead analyst for companies in Malaysia and Indonesia. His specific focus is on companies in the mining, oil and gas, chemical and agribusiness sectors within the region. Xavier is also a regular speaker at conferences on credit matters in ASEAN. Before his current role, Xavier was an Associate Director with S&P Global Ratings' Risk Solutions team in London, where he developed credit risk assessment models of obligors in the chemicals, metals & mining and oil and gas-related industries.  Minimize
Ivan Tan Director, Financial Institutions Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
 
http://str.sg/oVCz
Copy
JAKARTA (REUTERS) - Indonesian presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto is to challenge the official election result in the Constitutional Court, campaign team official Sufmi Dasco said on Tuesday (May 21).
Mr Prabowo lost last month's presidential election to incumbent President Joko Widodo, who secured 55.5 per cent of the public vote, the election commission's official count showed earlier on Tuesday.
The result released by the General Election Commission (KPU) confirms unofficial counts by private pollsters that showed Mr Joko winning the election. 
Mr Prabowo, a retired general, has steadfastly refused to concede defeat after claiming widespread cheating.
"We decided the number two (Prabowo) ticket will lodge a lawsuit with the Constitutional Court," Mr Sufmi, the legal director of  Prabowo's campaign team, told reporters. 
Earlier, a witness for the team and the leading opposition party refused to sign and validate the official results, announced more than a day earlier than expected, after the agency worked into the early hours of Tuesday. 
"We won't give up in the face of this injustice, cheating, lies, and these actions against democracy," said Mr Azis Subekti, the witness. 
 
25 Photos
In Focus
Yesterday in Jakarta, after it was announced that incumbent President Joko Widodo had been reelected as president of Indonesia, beating former General Prabowo Subianto by 11 percentage points, Subianto's supporters took to the streets. Protesters made claims of widespread cheating, and clashed with riot police in several locations in Jakarta, setting fire to vehicles and buildings. Police reportedly responded with tear gas and rubber bullets, arresting hundreds. After 24 hours of chaos, six people were reported to have died in the protests—the cause of their deaths are under investigation—and more than 200 were listed as injured. Subianto says he plans to contest the election results in court.
Protesters, police clash in second night of post-election protests in Indonesia
Agustinus Bea Da Costa
Published: May 22 at 5:19 a.m.
Updated: May 22 at 5:32 p.m.
By Kanupriya Kapoor and Tommy Ardiansyah
JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesian police fired water cannon and rubber bullets at protesters setting fires and trying to breach barbed wire barricades on Wednesday as demonstrations over the outcome of the presidential election hit the capital for a second night.
The riots followed an announcement on Tuesday by the General Election Commission (KPU) confirming that President Joko Widodo had beaten his challenger, former general Prabowo Subianto, in the April 17 poll.
Widodo won more than 85 million votes of 154 million cast, but retired general Prabowo has alleged "massive cheating and irregularities" and refused to concede defeat.
The election supervisory agency dismissed claims of systematic cheating, citing a lack of evidence. Independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Protesters gathered outside the election supervisory agency in central Jakarta. Some arriving carried wooden poles and some had smeared toothpaste around their eyes, a practice commonly carried out to eliminate the effects of tear gas.
Many left peacefully but as night fell others hurled firecrackers and other objects at officers and set blazes as they tried to breach the barbed wire separating them from police.
Police responded with rounds of tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannon.
Medics were seen treating dozens of protesters affected by tear gas and using oxygen to revive some who had passed out.
On Tuesday, the Tanah Abang area had also seen protests turn violent after nightfall. Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan said by Wednesday morning six people had been killed and 200 wounded.
Widodo warned of tough action against those instigating riots.
"I will not tolerate anyone disrupting the security ... or those who disrupt the democratic process or the unity of the country," he told a briefing at the presidential palace.
Chief security minister Wiranto said the government would  temporarily block certain social media functions to prevent inflammatory hoaxes and fake news.
Indonesian authorities say 40,000 police and army personnel are on duty across Jakarta to maintain security. Many office buildings, businesses and embassies in downtown Jakarta were closed, as were train stations in the area.
"WE KNOW WHO IS BEHIND THIS"
Police said at three locations in the capital 257 suspects had been detained who were suspected of starting riots.
Prabowo called for peaceful protests and restraint.
"I urge all sides, the people who are expressing their aspirations, the police, the military and all sides to refrain from physical abuse," he told a briefing.
Many of the protesters appeared to have come from outside Jakarta and police found envelopes containing money on some of the people they searched, national police spokesman Muhamad Iqbal told a news conference.
"This is not a spontaneous incident, this is something by design. There are indications that the mobs are paid and bent on causing chaos," he said.
Later at a news conference, police displayed suspects in orange jumpsuits as well as petrol bombs, makeshift arrows, sickles and cash in envelopes.
The KPU on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters that gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for Prabowo.
A Prabowo campaign official said they planned to contest the result in the Constitutional Court on Thursday. Prabowo also launched a legal challenge after he was defeated in the 2014 election by Widodo, which was unsuccessful.
Analysts have said Widodo's double-digit margin of victory means the opposition does not have a strong case to claim rigging, but Islamist supporters of Prabowo could cause considerable disruption.
Islamist groups, many of which support Prabowo, have in the past been able to mobilize mass support.
From late 2016, they organized a series of protests against then-Jakarta governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the first ethnic-Chinese Christian to hold the job, who was subsequently jailed for insulting the Koran.
Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko said he believed there was "a systematic effort by a certain group ... that is riding on the situation to muddy the situation".
"We know who is behind this," he said.
Of the six reported fatalities, a 30-year-old man was killed due to a blunt force trauma, said Dr. Sumariyono at the Cipto Mangunkusumo hospital in Jakarta. Another man died of bullet wounds, news website Tirto.com reported, quoting a doctor at another hospital.
National police chief Tito Karnavian said reports of the deaths were being investigated. Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said security forces, including military personnel, were not armed with live bullets.
(Additional reporting by Wilda Asmarini, Kanupriya Kapoor, Agustinus Beo Da Costa, Gayatri Suroyo, Fransiska Nangoy, Ed Davies, Fanny Potkin; Writing by John Chalmers and Ed Davies; Editing by Alison Williams)
More World stories
0:56
Six killed as Indonesia protests turn deadly – video
Six people died and more than 200 were injured in the Indonesian capital Jakarta after protesters clashed with security forces and set fire to a police dormitory and vehicles, officials have said.
Protests by supporters of an unsuccessful presidential candidate that had ended peacefully on Tuesday afternoon resumed and turned violent late on Tuesday and continued through the night, said the national police spokesman, Dedi Prasetyo. Police said they had arrested 20 "provocateurs".
Several thousand demonstrators gathered to protest the results , in an area that was in a total security lockdown. Central Jakarta, usually bustling and full of traffic was eerily quiet by the evening.
Behind reams of barbed wire that separated protesters from a heavy military and police presence, some demonstrators held flowers and signs highlighting the deaths of rioters earlier today.
The Jakarta governor, Anies Baswedan, said hospitals were conducting postmortems to determine the causes of the deaths.
Authorities were still investigating and were not willing to rule out the involvement of "third-party provocateurs", said another police official.
Jakarta has been on edge in recent days amid simmering tensions in the aftermath of April's presidential election. Official results on Tuesday confirmed the incumbent, President Joko Widodo , had won a second term with 55.5% of the vote.
His opponent, the fiery ex-special forces commander Prabowo Subianto, has refused to accept the result, alleging the poll was marred by widespread fraud – a claim his team has yet to produce compelling evidence to support.
Indonesian troops on alert as Widodo wins more than half of votes
Read more
Indonesia's security minister, Wiranto, said authorities would restrict access to social media in certain areas to prevent the spread of fake news.
In a press conference this afternoon, Prabowo Subianto denounced the clashes and urged his supporters to protest peacefully.
"We are peaceful, not treasonous," said Rusli, a 46-year-old Jakarta resident, and Prabowo supporter who attended the rally, "The voting data has been manipulated and our the rights of our voices has been diminished. We want justice."
Indonesia's Kompas TV showed protesters throwing rocks, a paramilitary police dormitory on fire, and hundreds of riot police in a central Jakarta neighbourhood. One man reportedly died after sustaining a gunshot wound in the melee, according to Tirto. id , an Indonesian news website.
Prasetyo said police were checking on reports of casualties, but stressed that security officers on the ground, which include military personnel, were not equipped with live bullets.
A police spokesman said police used teargas and water cannon against protesters who threw rocks, molotov cocktails and burning projectiles.
Protesters, police clash in second night of post-election protests in Indonesia
Agustinus Bea Da Costa
Published: May 22 at 5:19 a.m.
Updated: May 22 at 5:32 p.m.
By Kanupriya Kapoor and Tommy Ardiansyah
JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesian police fired water cannon and rubber bullets at protesters setting fires and trying to breach barbed wire barricades on Wednesday as demonstrations over the outcome of the presidential election hit the capital for a second night.
The riots followed an announcement on Tuesday by the General Election Commission (KPU) confirming that President Joko Widodo had beaten his challenger, former general Prabowo Subianto, in the April 17 poll.
Widodo won more than 85 million votes of 154 million cast, but retired general Prabowo has alleged "massive cheating and irregularities" and refused to concede defeat.
The election supervisory agency dismissed claims of systematic cheating, citing a lack of evidence. Independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Protesters gathered outside the election supervisory agency in central Jakarta. Some arriving carried wooden poles and some had smeared toothpaste around their eyes, a practice commonly carried out to eliminate the effects of tear gas.
Many left peacefully but as night fell others hurled firecrackers and other objects at officers and set blazes as they tried to breach the barbed wire separating them from police.
Police responded with rounds of tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannon.
Medics were seen treating dozens of protesters affected by tear gas and using oxygen to revive some who had passed out.
On Tuesday, the Tanah Abang area had also seen protests turn violent after nightfall. Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan said by Wednesday morning six people had been killed and 200 wounded.
Widodo warned of tough action against those instigating riots.
"I will not tolerate anyone disrupting the security ... or those who disrupt the democratic process or the unity of the country," he told a briefing at the presidential palace.
Chief security minister Wiranto said the government would  temporarily block certain social media functions to prevent inflammatory hoaxes and fake news.
Indonesian authorities say 40,000 police and army personnel are on duty across Jakarta to maintain security. Many office buildings, businesses and embassies in downtown Jakarta were closed, as were train stations in the area.
"WE KNOW WHO IS BEHIND THIS"
Police said at three locations in the capital 257 suspects had been detained who were suspected of starting riots.
Prabowo called for peaceful protests and restraint.
"I urge all sides, the people who are expressing their aspirations, the police, the military and all sides to refrain from physical abuse," he told a briefing.
Many of the protesters appeared to have come from outside Jakarta and police found envelopes containing money on some of the people they searched, national police spokesman Muhamad Iqbal told a news conference.
"This is not a spontaneous incident, this is something by design. There are indications that the mobs are paid and bent on causing chaos," he said.
Later at a news conference, police displayed suspects in orange jumpsuits as well as petrol bombs, makeshift arrows, sickles and cash in envelopes.
The KPU on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters that gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for Prabowo.
A Prabowo campaign official said they planned to contest the result in the Constitutional Court on Thursday. Prabowo also launched a legal challenge after he was defeated in the 2014 election by Widodo, which was unsuccessful.
Analysts have said Widodo's double-digit margin of victory means the opposition does not have a strong case to claim rigging, but Islamist supporters of Prabowo could cause considerable disruption.
Islamist groups, many of which support Prabowo, have in the past been able to mobilize mass support.
From late 2016, they organized a series of protests against then-Jakarta governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the first ethnic-Chinese Christian to hold the job, who was subsequently jailed for insulting the Koran.
Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko said he believed there was "a systematic effort by a certain group ... that is riding on the situation to muddy the situation".
"We know who is behind this," he said.
Of the six reported fatalities, a 30-year-old man was killed due to a blunt force trauma, said Dr. Sumariyono at the Cipto Mangunkusumo hospital in Jakarta. Another man died of bullet wounds, news website Tirto.com reported, quoting a doctor at another hospital.
National police chief Tito Karnavian said reports of the deaths were being investigated. Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said security forces, including military personnel, were not armed with live bullets.
(Additional reporting by Wilda Asmarini, Kanupriya Kapoor, Agustinus Beo Da Costa, Gayatri Suroyo, Fransiska Nangoy, Ed Davies, Fanny Potkin; Writing by John Chalmers and Ed Davies; Editing by Alison Williams)
More World stories
Listen
Four dead in post-election riot in Indonesia's Papua
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said.
More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district.
The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name.
The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said.
More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district.
The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name.
The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
Latest News
Listen
Four dead in post-election riot in Indonesia's Papua
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said. More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district. The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name. The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said. More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district. The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name. The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
Latest News
Jakarta riot violations under spotlight
Rights groups set up complaint centers to log allegations of targeted violence, torture during post-election unrest
Police face off against protesters outside the election commission building in Jakarta on May 21. Three right groups in Jakarta have opened complaint centers to log alleged violations during post-election riots in the Indonesian capital May 21-22. (Photo by Konradus Epa/ucanews.com)
Indonesia
May 28, 2019
Three Indonesian rights organizations have set up a center where victims of alleged targeted and excessive violence during rioting in Jakarta last week can file complaints.
Two days of rioting by supporters of defeated presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto rocked the capital on May 21-22 after the election commission officially announced President Joko Widodo had won a second term following presidential elections in April.
At least eight people were killed and more than 700 injured during the unrest.
According to the Commission for Missing Persons and Victims of Violence (KontraS), the Jakarta Legal Aid Institute (LBH Jakarta) and the Legal Aid Institute for the Press (LBH Pers) there were at least 14 incidents of targeted violence during the riots, including attacks on journalists.
"Based on this, we have open complaint centers for those who may of fallen victim to shootings, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture or rights violations during the riots," Yati Andriyani, coordinator of KontraS, said on May 27.
She said complaints can be filed in person or online and that any relevant evidence should be provided.
Ahmad Fatanah, from LBH Pers said the centers would be open for about a week.
"After that, all the complaints will be presented to the National Commission on Human Rights (Komnas HAM) for further investigation," he told ucanews.com.
Referring to the reported violence against journalists , he said at least 20 journalists were subjected to acts of intimidation and attacks.
Of that number, according to the Alliance of Independent Journalists, rioters committed seven incidents, while police were allegedly responsible for 11 others. Two further cases were still being verified, Fatanah said.
Azas Tigor Nainggolan, coordinator of the human rights desk at the Indonesian bishops' Commission for Justice, Peace and Pastoral for Migrant-Itinerant People, welcomed the NGOs' move. 
"The Church supports good enforcement of the law and the protection of human rights," he told ucanews.com.
He said with or without such complaint centers, an investigation must be conducted.
"The government must work with Komnas HAM and look into human rights violations committed by police personnel. This must be done to deter any future occurrences," he said.
A video showing an unarmed man being repeatedly beaten with sticks by police went viral after the riots. The National Police confirmed the incident had taken place and said the man had supplied rocks to rioters.
Sign up to receive UCAN Daily Full Bulletin
Thank you. You are now                    signed up to our Daily Full                    Bulletin newsletter
Komnas HAM has formed a special team to conduct an investigation into human rights violations that occurred during the riots and will soon meet with the National Police.
Related Reports
Post-Election, Indonesian President Expected to Go Soft on China Despite Maritime Flaps
share
Print
TAIPEI — 
Indonesian President Joko Widodo is expected to warm toward China in his second term in search of infrastructure funding instead of challenging Chinese sovereignty in a fishery-rich sea between them.
The leader who since 2014 has emphasized domestic issues in Asia's third largest country rather than foreign policy initiatives will probably build up Indonesia's status as a node in China's $1 trillion-plus Belt and Road Initiative, scholars who know the country say. The 6-year-old initiative is aimed at opening trade routes around Eurasia via infrastructure projects.
Indonesia's government will repel any Chinese vessels from waters it claims near the Natuna Islands, experts say, but otherwise avoid confronting the militarily stronger China over maritime sovereignty. The president, often known by his hybridized name Jokowi, won a second five-year term April 17.
"Although Jokowi sought to downplay Chinese-funded projects in recent elections, he is likely to continue the current stance of attracting Chinese capital for infrastructure development while reinforcing defenses around the Natuna islands against Chinese encroachments and illegal fishing," said Mohan Malik, a professor in Asian security with the Daniel K. Inouye Asia Pacific Center for Security Studies in the United States.
Stable Sino-Indonesian relations would advance Beijing's goal of keeping Western-aligned powers out of the South China Sea dispute, possibly in Indonesia's defense, while ensuring that the impoverished archipelago of some 13,000 islands gets vital infrastructure support.
No compromise on the Natuna Islands
Widodo's next five years as president are expected overall to extend his maritime policies since 2016. Widodo parted ways around then with five predecessors by trying to shape Indonesia as a maritime power, according to published research by the East-West Center think tank in Honolulu. It says he sought to turn Indonesia into a "two-ocean, Indo-Pacific power" in view of the archipelago's expanse.
China claims most of the 3.5 million-square-kilometer South China Sea that reaches from the Natuna chain to the Chinese mainland. China doesn't claim the tiny Natuna islets, but in 2016 its foreign ministry cited historic rights for its fishing boats to use nearby waters.
Indonesian authorities have burned dozens of foreign fishing boats, and last year the country opened a base in the Natuna Islands with a hangar for drones and up to 1,000 personnel who could be trained for any kind of operation.
"Back then, Jokowi basically said you need to guard Indonesia's status as a maritime power," said Alan Chong, associate professor at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore, referring to Widodo's first term. The base, he said, "is in line, very clearly in line, with that."
Also last year, Indonesia renamed part of the disputed ocean tract the North Natuna Sea, drawing an angry response from China.
China might look for natural gas deposits in the contested waters, said Carl Thayer, emeritus professor at the University of New South Wales in Australia. But if Indonesia just repels individual Chinese vessels without making a political scene, he said, it's harder for China to initiate any trouble.
"Unless there's provocation or an incident that comes up, Indonesia basically won't react too much to the matter of those islands," said Tai Wan-ping, Southeast Asia-specialized international business professor at Cheng Shiu University in Taiwan. "They might make a verbal response but not military action."
Capital from China
Indonesia's reliance on China for help developing infrastructure will temper ambitions to stand up for the Natuna waters, some analysts believe.
Widodo's comments on foreign relations are aimed at courting Chinese development help rather than in taking a stand on "issues such as the South China Sea crisis," writer Nithin Coca said in a report for the Lowy Institute for International Policy in Australia.
Indonesia was once "more cautious in its approach" to the Belt and Road, "conscious of ensuring that investments bring real benefits to the nation while minimizing any negative effects," Jakarta-based investment research and advisory institute Tenggara Strategics said last year in a research paper.
In August, Widodo told the Indonesian People's Consultative Assembly his government would focus on "acceleration of infrastructure development" to catch up with other countries and create new economic centers in the country.
China has already offered billions of U.S. dollars to Indonesia for infrastructure such as a railway line on the main island Java. Too much could irritate Indonesians who already resent China so much that they rioted in the 1960s against ethnic Chinese in their country.
"He wants the ports through the archipelago to be modernized and the sea lanes to become the really major safe transit route, and so getting extra crumbs or not so much crumbs, half a loaf of bread, from China would be to his advantage, but I think there also is an underlying anti-China sentiment in Indonesia," Thayer said.
Related
Indonesian Police: 4 Top Officials Target of Failed Assassination Plot
share
Print
Indonesian police say four top government officials were the targets of an assassination plot that may have been linked to last week's deadly post-presidential riots in Jakarta.
National police chief Tito Karnavian told reporters Tuesday the intended victims of the plot were chief security minister Wiranto who uses just one name, intelligence agency chief Budi Gunawan, maritime affairs minister Luhut Pandjaitan, and Gories Mere, a special adviser to President Joko Widodo. Karnavian said the identities of the targets were revealed after six people were arrested on Monday in connection with the plot.
Wiranto, who appeared at the press conference with Karnavian, said the plot was intended to "create fear."
At least eight people were killed and hundreds injured during two nights of clashes in the Indonesian capital between security forces and supporters of presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto, a former special forces general who was soundly defeated by President Widodo in the April 17 vote. Security officials say they believe the protests, which began after Widodo was officially declared the winner, were organized by several groups, including hardline Islamic militants.
Prabowo has refused to concede the election, alleging massive fraud and irregularities while providing no evidence, and challenged the result in the Constitutional Court.
VOA News
Unlimited access to washingtonpost.com on any device
Unlimited access to all Washington Post apps
No on-site advertising or third-party ad tracking
Please enable cookies on your web browser in order to continue.
The new European data protection law requires us to inform you of the following before you use our website:
We use cookies and other technologies to customize your experience, perform analytics and deliver personalized advertising on our sites, apps and newsletters and across the Internet based on your interests. By clicking "I agree" below, you consent to the use by us and our third-party partners of cookies and data gathered from your use of our platforms. See our Privacy Policy and Third Party Partners to learn more about the use of data and your rights. You also agree to our Terms of Service .
I agree
Indonesian police arrest six over assassination plot during Jakarta unrest
Indonesian anti-riot police take their position to disperse the mob during an overnight-violent demonstration near by the Elections Oversight Body (Bawaslu) in Jakarta on May 22, 2019.
PHOTO: AFP
South China Morning Post
May 28, 2019
Indonesian police have arrested six suspects believed to be linked with a plan to assassinate four state officials and a prominent pollster as part of a broader plot to sow unrest ahead of last week's Jakarta riots that left eight people dead.
Five men and one woman had been detained on suspicion of accepting payments to carry out contract killings or supplying weapons, according to Indonesian police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal.
"The leader of the team received 150 million rupiah (S$14,400), while another suspect received 25 million from one person," Iqbal said on Monday, declining to disclose the names of the targets.
Iqbal said police also knew the identity of the person who ordered the assassination attempts, which had been set up in March and April. Several parts of the Indonesian capital had been photographed and mapped out for the plots, he added.
"But Allah still loves this country, and we were given a way to uncover this," Iqbal said.
The ringleader of the plan, referred to by police only as HS, had bought four firearms which he distributed to three other suspects, according to Iqbal. HS and three others are accused of carrying out the attempted killings, while the remaining two suspects are thought to have supplied the weapons.
All have been charged under a 1951 emergency law covering the possession and delivery of illegal firearms. They could face life imprisonment if convicted.
Last week, Jakarta was rocked by riots triggered by mass protests against the re-election of incumbent President Joko Widodo , who triumphed over rival Prabowo Subianto after securing 55.5 per cent of the vote.
Read also
Four shot dead by police in Indonesia as post-election riots spread
Prabowo has lodged a legal challenge against the result at Indonesia's Constitutional Court, alleging widespread fraud and claiming Widodo should have been disqualified. But independent observers have said the elections were generally free and fair.
Authorities on Monday also revealed that rioters had deliberately attacked a mobile brigade police hostel in the Petamburan area of Jakarta in an attempt to steal weapons.
Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said 50 officers had managed to secure the weapons and ammunition despite coming under sustained attack from hundreds of people throwing stones and petrol bombs.
One week on from the riots, security remains tight at a number of spots across the capital.
On Monday a small group of demonstrators turned up at Jakarta's iconic National Monument to protest against the police force's handling of the unrest.
A flier had been circulated on social media calling on people to rally in support of suggestions that Indonesian police chief Tito Karnavian be removed from his job, but the protest was cancelled due to insufficient turnout.
Over the weekend the headquarters of the mobile brigade police at Purwokerto in central Java was attacked in the early hours of Saturday by an unknown gunman carrying automatic firearms.
An officer was shot in the head and had to be rushed to hospital.
Central Java commander Tori Kristiyanto said the assailant had fired from a car at a police guard post at around 1.30am.
A day later a member of Prabowo's campaign team, Mustofa Nahrawardaya, was arrested for spreading false information about the riots on Twitter as well as racial and religious hate speech.
The politician from the National Mandate Party stood as a candidate in local legislative elections in Central Java this year but failed to win a seat in parliament. He is widely known for his activism on social media.
Read also
Nahrawardaya is also an administrator at Islamic NGO Muhammadiyah, where he is listed as the organiser of library information for its central leadership. He is a member of the organisation's broadcasting and public information division.
One of the eight who died in last week's rioting included a 15-year-old boy.
The chairman of the Indonesian Commission for the Protection of Children on Monday said religious teachers had last week directed youngsters to take part in the violence.
Susanto added that other children had simply been encouraged to join in by their peers.
The organisation has identified at least 52 children involved who had since been placed in a social rehabilitation hall in Jakarta.
"[The commission] appeals to all parties, including religious leaders, not to invite children to take part in any political activities," Susanto said.
Rusli Karim, a 15-year-old Jakarta high school student, said: "I joined the protest to defend Islam, to defend our nation from being ruled by a Muslim who never shows a willingness to protect or defend Islam."
Additional reporting by Reuters
This article was first published in South China Morning Post .
More about
Posted by Campaign and Advocacy With 0 Comment In Indonesia , News & Press
For Immediate release
Bangkok, Thailand
May 24, 2019
The Asian Network for Free Elections (ANFREL) condemns the recent rounds of violence on May 22 in Jakarta, Indonesia. ANFREL and its membership in the region call for all election stakeholders to exercise sobriety, especially in this period of reflection and contemplation for our Muslim brothers and sisters.  Most importantly, we call on all fronts to respect the rule of law and peacefully settle electoral disputes and differences judicially.
The unrest happened a day after the General Election Commission of Indonesia (KPU) announced that incumbent president Joko Widodo won the polls with around 85 million votes, beating former general Prabowo Subianto. Prabowo's camp alleged massive cheating and irregularities, thus refusing to concede defeat and expressing desires to contest the outcome of the elections in court. While lapses in electoral management have indeed occurred, including the death of more than 300 polling officers, credible analysts and monitoring groups are yet to report any proof which can discredit the integrity of the April 2019 polls.
According to authorities and news reports, the violence was instigated by 275 "paid provocateurs", who threw fireworks and rocks at the police, who then responded with teargas, rubber bullets and water cannons. The City Government of Jakarta relayed the sad news that there were 6 casualties on the first night of the riots, and 350 people were sent to hospitals due to severe wounds. Around 40,000 security forces were deployed in Jakarta, and access to social media was blocked to deescalate the situation.
ANFREL calls on all stakeholders to respect the democratic process and, more importantly, respect the will of the people to hold a peaceful and orderly election process. We also call on the civil society and the media to ensure that such process is monitored well, and that the people are given proper information. Finally, we call on all Indonesian election management bodies to maintain transparency and facilitate the fast resolution of all electoral disputes.
The organization regrets that a largely peaceful election process was tainted by the senseless violence which occurred.
Jokowi won vote count in Indonesian election: official result
Opposition has 72 hours to challenge result in constitutional court
SHOTARO TANI, Nikkei staff writer
May 21, 2019 04:32 JST
Indonesia's President Joko Widodo, left, hold as news conference with running mate Ma'ruf Amin after a quick count result during nationwide elections on April 17.   ©             Reuters
JAKARTA -- Indonesia's election commission has confirmed President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo took more votes than his opponent, former general Prabowo Subianto, in April's presidential election, opening the way for the incumbent to lead the country for the next five years.
Widodo's camp took 55.5% of votes cast, beating Prabowo for the second presidential race in a row, the General Elections Commission, or KPU, said early Tuesday. Prabowo's share came to 44.5%, according to the official results.
The announcement confirms the results of quick counts that showed Widodo securing around 55% of the vote.
The Subianto camp now has three days to challenge the official count in the constitutional court. His team has claimed the election was riddled with irregularities such as modified tallies, invalid voter lists and the burning of ballot papers by Widodo supporters.
Should he lodge a complaint, the court will be forced to look into evidence provided by the opposition and come up with a verdict before a late June deadline. He also contested the results of the July 2014 election, and it took the court another month to formally reject the claims.
Barring such an appeal, Widodo and his vice presidential pick, the influential Muslim cleric Ma'ruf Amin, will officially be confirmed the winner on Friday.
The constitutional court has the power to overrule the result and order a partial or full rerun of the election as needed. Regardless of its decision, the world's third-largest democracy will welcome its new president in October.
The Prabowo camp said in a statement last week that it will "reject the result of the KPU count of the votes" as there had been "countless acts of fraud in the election." But senior figures in the opposition have also said they will not dispute the results in the court as they view the process as a "waste of time," local media have reported.
Subianto and his supporters may take other steps such as taking to the streets to protest the official count. Security was stepped up around the election agency ahead of the announcement.
While the former general has been careful not to incite violence as that may land him in hot water, he has repeatedly called for "People Power" to protest against the interim vote count. Analysts warn this could lead to civil unrest similar to that in 1998, which led to the fall of dictator Suharto's autocratic regime, and a tense political standoff that lasts weeks.
Some opposition politicians have urged supporters to take steps such as not paying taxes in protest at the Jokowi administration.
Meanwhile, Indonesia's security apparatus continues to be on high alert after receiving intelligence of possible terrorist attacks in Jakarta during and after the release of the official counts.
As of Friday, national police had detained 29 people suspected of plotting strikes in May alone. All them were associated with Jamaah Ansharut Daulah, or JAD, the largest Indonesian pro-Islamic State cell.
"We call on the people not to go to the street in massive numbers because these groups are unpredictable," Muhammad Iqbal, spokesperson for the national police, said on Friday. "They are targeting the democracy event where large numbers of people gather. There should be no mass gathering... because it will be very prone to bomb and other kind of attacks."
Stay ahead with our exclusives on Asia
Sign up to our newsletters to get our best stories delivered straight to your inbox.
See Also
Search form
Search
AFP Indonesia
Published on Monday 27 May 2019 at 07:00
Two photos of a television report have been shared tens of thousands of times in multiple Facebook posts alongside a claim that they show Indonesian presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto received 63 per cent of the votes in Indonesia's 2019 presidential election. The claim is false; the figure highlighted as evidence for the claim in the misleading posts actually refers to 68,650,239 votes, not 63 per cent of the votes; Prabowo and his running mate Sandiaga Uno received 44.5 per cent of the votes according to Indonesia's General Elections Commission (KPU).
The photos were shared in this May 21, 2019, Facebook post. It has been shared more than 23,000 times.
The Indonesian language caption in the misleading Facebook posts translates to English as: "This is the evidence that 63 per cent of the votes were in favour of Prabowo! It then was quickly changed to 44 per cent! May God curse you".
Below is a screenshot of the post:
A screenshot of the misleading Facebook post
The photos show a television report featuring KPU chairman Arief Budiman announcing presidential Indonesia's election results on May 21. This is his official Twitter account.
This is an AFP report about the presidential election.
In both photos, Indonesian text in a blue box on the lower part of the screen translates to English as: "Announcement of the 2019 election results."
President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo faced Prabowo Subianto in the April election. They are listed as the presidential candidates on the official website of the General Elections Commission (KPU) here .
The same photos were shared with an identical claim on Facebook here .
The claim is false; the figure highlighted as evidence for the claim in the misleading posts refers to 68,650,239 votes, not 63 per cent of the votes; Prabowo and his running mate Sandiaga Uno received 44.5 per cent of the votes according to Indonesia's KPU.
The first image in the misleading posts includes a television banner which shows Prabowo and his running mate Sandiaga Uno got 68,650,239 votes, while Jokowi and his vice presidential candidate Ma'ruf Amin got 85,607,362 votes.
Below is a screenshot of the first photo:
A screenshot of the first photo in the misleading Facebook post
The second image in the misleading posts includes a television banner which shows Jokowi received 55.50 per cent of the votes, while Prabowo received 44.50 per cent.
Below is a screenshot of the second photo:
A screenshot of the second photo in the misleading Facebook post
The KPU announced on May 21, 2019, that the president had won the election.
This video on the KPU's official YouTube channel includes Arief Budiman's announcement. The final results are shown on screen at the 19 minute 39 second mark.
The same number of votes and percentage of votes for each candidate were also reported by Indonesian news site Kompas here and on BBC Indonesia here .​
Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
May 22, 2019
JAKARTA: Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
Indonesian police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated.
The national police chief has said the public should not assume police were responsible.
Social media has been restricted in some areas to stop rumours spreading.
National police chief Tito Karnavian denied that his officers had used live ammunition and called for calm.
"Some had gunshot wounds, some had blunt force wounds but we still need to clarify this," he said, referring to the six dead, who are believed to have been killed overnight on Tuesday.
The authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous".
They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
Protesters have been gathering again in the city on Wednesday.
Protests in the capital Jakarta started peacefully on Tuesday but soon turned violent, with cars set on fire and firecrackers thrown at police.
Police in riot gear fired tear gas to disperse the crowd.
The protests erupted after election results showed Mr Widodo had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto.
The country's General Election Commission confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Widodo had won the presidency, taking 55.5% of votes.
Mr Prabowo has rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission has dismissed his claims.
The ex-general also lost against Mr Widodo at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
More than 192 million people were eligible to vote in the presidential and general elections that took place on 17 April.
After the official results were announced on Tuesday, thousands gathered in front of the election supervisory building in support of Mr Prabowo, but later moved on to other areas across Jakarta after police urged the crowd to disperse, according to BBC Indonesian.
Local TV stations showed several standoffs between protesters and police in parts of the city.
More than 30,000 troops had been deployed in Jakarta in anticipation of potential violence.
Yesterday, chief security minister Wiranto, who uses just a single name, said access to social media would be blocked in some areas.
The restrictions – including on photo and video sharing – aimed to control the spread of misinformation, he said.
– BBC
Jakarta riots reveal Indonesia's deep divisions
Jakarta riots reveal Indonesia's deep divisions
Indonesia's post-election violence highlights the tension over the place of Islam in the democracy and what is now a deep rift in the country's politics
By Professor Tim Lindsey, University of Melbourne
Share selection to:
The violent riots that shook Jakarta last week led to at least six deaths , over 700 injured and more than 200 arrests.
Demonstrations and rallies are common in Indonesia, but street violence like this had not been seen since the fall of Soeharto in 1998.
Students protest Soeharto's regime in 1998. Picture: Getty Images
Protests began peacefully in front of the Elections Supervisory Agency (Bawaslu) on May 20, after the General Elections Commission (KPU) made the surprise decision to release its official count at 3am that morning.
By 9pm on Tuesday, rioters supporting the defeated presidential candidate, former general Prabowo Subianto, (including some apparently linked to Islamic State) were burning cars and buildings, and using rocks, petrol bombs and fireworks to attack police.
Security forces responded with tear gas, water cannons and rubber bullets. They claim not to have used real bullets, although families of at least two victims claim they died of bullet wounds and the National Police Hospital says autopsies show four died this way.
Read more
The violence was repeated the next night and spread beyond Jakarta, with incidents in East Java and Potianak (Kalimantan) as well. The government called in the army to help control the situation.
Obviously deeply concerned, it took the extraordinary step of slowing down the internet to obstruct the sharing of provocative material across social media sites.
Two nights later, the government seemed to have the situation under control.
On Friday, Prabowo's campaign lodged protests against the election results with the Constitutional Court. They argue that the convincing 10 per cent-plus margin of victory of his rival, President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo, was fraudulently obtained. To date, they have not been able to produce convincing evidence to back this up.
If, as likely, the court rejects the petition to annul Jokowi's win, that may well spark another round of rioting. This is particularly so because Prabowo's camp has been saying for weeks that the court is biased in favour of the government.
Supporters of the defeated presidential candidate, former general Prabowo Subianto, rioted in Jakarta. Picture: Getty Images
But even if the rioting starts up again, it is very unlikely to topple Jokowi, given the government, police and army seem to have closed ranks behind him.
Many members of the elite do not particularly like Jokowi, a provincial politician who made a spectacular leap to the presidency five years ago and remains somewhat of an outsider.
But he has the huge advantage of incumbency. Leaders of the bureaucracy and security forces owe their positions, wealth and power to his administration. They fear being replaced in the purge of senior positions that would follow if Prabowo somehow took over.
Read more
Even though Prabowo's fourth bid to become president seems doomed and Jokowi is doubtless confident of being sworn in on October 20, that does not mean Jokowi's second and final five-year term will be smooth sailing.
The riots seem to have fizzled out, but they are the product of tensions over the place of Islam in Indonesian life and what is now a deep cleavage in Indonesian politics.
To explain how this has happened, we need to go back to 2017 and the major crisis of Jokowi's first term: the prosecution and conviction for blasphemy of then Jakarta Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (known as Ahok, or BTP, as he now prefers).
Ahok had been the deputy governor under Jokowi and stepped up when Jokowi resigned to run for the presidency. An ethnic Chinese Christian governor was seen as unacceptable to hardline Islamists.
Jakarta Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (known as Ahok) was sentenced to two years in prison for blasphemy. Picture: Getty Images
They used comments about the Qur'an made by Ahok while campaigning for re-election to launch a massive and bitter populist campaign against him.
Hundreds of thousands took part in rallies that targeted Ahok and, eventually, his former friend and close colleague, Jokowi, at one stage even marching on the palace.
After Ahok's fall, some of the Muslim organisations that had formed the so-called " 212 movement " to tear him down began aggressively targeting Jokowi. In response, Jokowi has taken tough measures against them, including giving himself new powers to ban civil society groups. He also backed criminal charges against figures he saw as leading public criticism of his government.
Read more
As a result, the disgruntled Islamist conservatives who loathe Jokowi lined up behind Prabowo, the only alternative candidate.
This split meant that many members of the world's largest Muslim organisation, Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), which is generally more tolerant of religious difference, sided with Jokowi, particularly after he chose NU leader Ma'ruf Amin as his running mate.
The world's second-largest Muslim organisation, Muhammadiyah , traditionally NU's rival, was officially neutral. But many of its members clearly sided with Prabowo.
So did other, more conservative, Muslim organisations, such as the Islamist PKS party, and more extreme groups like the thuggish Islamic Defenders Front (FPI) – and, of course, the 212 alumni.
The result was a vicious social media campaign, full of trolling, hoaxes and conspiracy theories, fake news and online vilification. Rumours that Jokowi is a closet Christian from a communist family were circulated once again .
Rumours that Jokowi was a closet Christian from a communist family circulated during the election. Picture: Getty Images
The election thus polarised Indonesia, reviving old divisions in an atmosphere of renewed anxiety about ethnic and religious identity. Jokowi prevailed in Javanese communities linked to NU and in areas where non-Muslims are a majority or a large minority, like Papua, Bali, East Nusa Tenggara and North Sulawesi.
On the other hand, majority Muslim outer islands often associated with Muhammadiyah largely fell to Prabowo, such as West Sumatra. Likewise, Prabowo took back South Sulawesi, Southeast Sulawesi, Bengkulu and Jambi from Jokowi, who won them in 2014.
West Java tells the story. Although part of Java, it has never been a NU stronghold but is seen as historically a centre for Islamist conservatism. It went for Prabowo. Jakarta, urban and more urbane, but on the cusp of West Java, was split.
Read more
Divisions show no sign of healing
Prabowo's defeat does not spell the end of his supporters' aspirations for a less tolerant Indonesia that privileges their brand of Islam. The election's geopolitical polarisation is likely to be a continuing source of problems for Jokowi in the years ahead.
With NU in the vice-presidential office and very likely to continue its stranglehold on the Ministry of Religious Affairs, resentment from Muhammadiyah, PKS and others will be maintained. It will play out in conflicts in the legislature and in and around government.
The tough measures Jokowi's administration – obviously worried – deployed in recent weeks to try to head off the riots has only exacerbated the situation. Former general Wiranto, now coordinating minister for politics, law and security, ominously formed a team to investigate "unconstitutional behavior".
Prabowo's defeat does not spell the end of his supporters' aspirations. Picture: Getty Images
Twenty or so people linked to Prabowo, including two former generals, have been arrested on charges including treason and weapons smuggling.
At one stage a warrant was issued to bring Prabowo himself in for questioning (although this was quickly rescinded).
These measures reflect a wider trend towards so-called "soft authoritarianism" in Jokowi's administration, which has concerned many Indonesian and foreign observers.
It also feeds the narrative promoted by his Islamist opponents of a president willing to use the full force of the state to marginalise them, and that simply entrenches the battlelines.
Jokowi is a pragmatic politician who values stability and cohesion above most other things. Once the riots die down, Jokowi's instinct will be to "buy in" the Muslim right and Prabowo's core supporters.
He may do this by offering them positions in the incoming administration or access to resources. If that doesn't work, we can expect more trouble ahead.
This article was first published on The Conversation .
Banner: Getty Images
Indonesian President Joko Widodo, left, and his running mate Ma'ruf Amin wave to journalists after a press conference in Jakarta, Indonesia, Wednesday, April 17, 2019.
Image Credit: AP Photo/Achmad Ibrahim
Indonesia's Surprisingly Quiet Election
In an era of increased electoral polarization and agitation, what are the lessons of Indonesia's tame campaign?
By Nithin Coca for The Diplomat
April 23, 2019
 
 
Quiet. Boring. Stable. Just two years after a dramatic race ousted a minority governor, Indonesia's concurrent presidential and parliamentary elections were downright tame, a stark contrast to dramatic, highly contested – and sometimes vicious – elections that took place last month in Thailand and are ongoing in India. Nor was it anything like the fake news and hate-filled elections in the United States and the Philippines in recent years.
"The election was peaceful," says Patrick Ziegenhain, a Jakarta-based scholar and currently a visiting professor at Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia. "No tension, no mass demonstrations, no huge campaign activities. It was more peaceful than previous elections in 2017 and 2014."
Despite a long campaigning period, several debates, and numerous news stories, polls only shifted marginally over the past year. Pollster quick counts show incumbent Joko "Jokowi" Widodo leading by about 8-10 percentage points – larger than his margin in 2014. Campaigning was mostly normal and rallies were peaceful. Even disinformation played a marginal role, with a poll from Saiful Mujani released before the election showing that few hoaxes were resonating with Indonesian voters.
Enjoying this article? Click here to subscribe for full access. Just $5 a month.
While opposition candidate Prabowo Subianto seems bent on contesting the results, most of the country has responded with a yawn. Only about 1,000 people showed up at his South Jakarta home for a post-election speech, timed to take place after Friday prayers, a paltry figure for a city of 10 million. In public discourse, he is looking more and more like a sore loser, and there are even rumors that his running mate, Sandiaga Uno, is distancing himself from Prabowo, as many note his conspicuous absence or lack of enthusiasm at post-election events.
So why was Indonesia's election so tame, compared to both the 2017 Jakarta governor's race, when incumbent Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama "Ahok" was defeated in a campaign where fake news, viral memes, and derogatory religious and ethnic rhetoric played a key role, and even the 2014 presidential race? In an era where countries around the world are seeing increased polarization and agitation around campaigns, are there lessons from Indonesia's campaign? Part of it was the ability to learn from past experiences, both domestically and abroad, and be prepared.
"Overall there was far more preparation and security for this election than for the 2017 Jakarta Governor's race," said Joshua Kurlantzick, senior fellow for Southeast Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations. Beyond the passing of controversial laws that allowed for the banning of groups like the Hizbut Tahrir , which helped organize the 2017 anti-Ahok movement. The government also set up a fake news monitoring center to tackle misinformation, going as far as to arrest the creators of hoaxes, including one alleging that tampered ballots were coming in from China pre-selected for Jokowi, and the housewife creators of a video alleging that the incumbent would make gay marriage legal.
Credit should also be given to Jokowi, who has proven himself an adept campaigner. While he hasn't kept all of his 2014 promises, including, notably, his pledges to address human rights, he has made real progress on expanding the country's social welfare system, investing in infrastructure, and growing the economy. He has also been able to maintain his image as a clean everyman, and still takes impromptu public visits to markets, and recently rode a crowded train to and from work like any other commuter.
Many see his choice of Ma'ruf Amin, albeit with significant outside pressure, as a key factor in defusing the potential for an Islamic-based opposition candidacy. However, the initial polls show that his presence may have not had such a large impact, as Jokowi performed worse than 2014 in more conservative Muslim-majority provinces like Aceh, West Sumatra, and South Sumatra.
It may also be time to reassess the conventional wisdom of the Jakarta governor's race. At the time, some saw it as a sign that Indonesia was turning toward conservative Islam. Others noted that the race likely had to do as much with Ahok's Chinese ethnicity, and his unique personality and proneness for speaking his mind, than religion. It is looking increasingly likely that the anti-Ahok mobilizations were a unique moment, not the signs of a deeper trend.
In fact, there is a tendency to overly focus on religion, and in particular Islam, when analyzing Indonesian politics. Even in this election, which lacked 2017 style mass mobilizations, religion has already been deemed the deciding factor by many international media outlets. Look at the post-election headlines at the New York Times ("Faith Politics on the Rise as Indonesian Islam Takes a Hard-Line Path") or Reuters ("In Indonesia's election, the winner is Widodo – and Islam").
The reality is more complicated. Even in the conservative provinces that Jokowi lost, religion may not have been decisive. According to one source, Jokowi's advisers saw lower commodity prices for palm oil and rice as likely factors in his lower vote figures in agriculture-dominated provinces of Sumatra and Kalimantan. In Indonesia, the economy – as in most democracies – can trump religion at the polls. Moreover Prabowo, the supposedly Islamist candidate, often mentioned the fact that his maternal family is Christian, as are two of his siblings. Jokowi's pandering to Islam did not stop him from participating in Hindu festivities while campaigning in Bali.
The big question is if Jokowi will be any different during his second term than he was in his first. Comparing his record to Prabowo's – a former general with a widely documented record of human rights abuses – only makes him good in comparison.
"Jokowi is, marginally, a more effective guardian of Indonesian democracy than Prabowo," said Kurlantzick. But his record gives him, and others, pause. "There is the use of dubious laws to stifle free speech, the crackdown on some of his opponents... and he has not expressed much interest in really stopping the growing crackdown on minorities."
Few expect Jokowi, even without the shackles of having to prepare for re-election, to change much. He went out of his way, since 2014, to build ties with entrenched powers like the military, appointing traditional power-brokers such as former generals Wiranto and Luhut Binsar Pandjaitan to his cabinet, giving them power over critical portfolios.
"Jokowi will continue like the last five years, people will complain about human rights in Papua, or that the LGBT community is not being accepted, or of discrimination against minorities," said Ziegenhain. "This cannot be turned around in the next five years."
It is a lost opportunity for a young democracy. Hope for real reform may have to wait until 2024, when Jokowi's successor will be elected. As of right now, that race looks wide open. Jokowi does not have a designated successor, as Ma'ruf Amin will be 80 then, likely too old to run. The same can be said of Prabowo, who has now lost three elections as a presidential or vice presidential candidate and will be 72 in 2024. Many expect Sandiaga to take the mantle as leader of Prabowo's Gerindra party and become the leader of the opposition. While Sandiaga has issues, including allegations of corruption , and was the running mate of the tandem that used religion to take down Ahok in 2017, he's a fairly mainstream, pro-business politician, far from a polarizing Rodrigo Duterte, Donald Trump, or Narendra Modi figure. Whether another, outsider candidate emerges seemingly from nowhere, as Jokowi did in 2014, remains to be seen.
It is telling that an election that changed little and was noteworthy for its stability and continuity is seen as global success. Compare 2019 to the situation a little over 20 years ago, when Indonesia was undergoing a financial crisis and emerging from the three-decades long Suharto dictatorship, and the progress looks remarkable, in some ways astounding that democracy has survived. But take a more narrow lens and it's less clear how much the country has improved when it comes to openness, transparency, and inclusivity under Jokowi or his predecessor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
"It will take time for democracy in Indonesia to grow, but it's better under Jokowi than Prabowo," said Ziegenhain.
The most that can be said is that Indonesia has not seen its democracy deteriorate to the extent that Thailand, the Philippines, or India have. More of the same, or stability, is now seen as a mark or progress.
Nithin Coca is a freelance writer and journalist who focuses on cultural, economic, and environmental issues in developing countries. Follow him on Twitter @excinit .
Topics
6 Dead in Indonesia Post-Election Protest
A mass protest against Indonesia's presidential poll result turned violent – and deadly.
By Agoes Rudianto for The Diplomat
May 23, 2019
Religion, Ethnicity, and Indonesia's 2019 Presidential Election
Now that Joko Widodo has been certified as the victor in Indonesia's 2019 presidential elections, the question turns to what happened. While the current media focus is rightly on the post-election violence that wracked Jakarta last week and who is responsible for them, we also need to understand what drove the electoral results themselves. Several enterprising scholars of Indonesian politics have been scraping the election results from the Electoral Commission's website , and two of them— Seth Soderborg and Nick Kuipers —were kind enough to share the district-level results with me. Combined with the results from the 2014 presidential election, which Jokowi also won over Prabowo, we can examine how voters responded to the same presidential candidate in the context of increasingly prominent identity politics.
Where Did Jokowi Win Votes?
The first thing to look at is the difference in vote share for Jokowi-Amin (JA) in 2019 versus Jokowi-Kalla (JK) in 2014. The figure below arranges all districts from highest to lowest vote share for Jokowi in 2014, and then shows how results have changed from 2014 (gray) to 2019 (red). This is called a "dumbell plot" . The results, broken down by province, are revealing. ( Here is a large PDF version.)
The first two provinces in the figure, Aceh and Bali, tell most of the story. In the overwhelmingly Muslim province of Aceh, support for Jokowi collapsed, even relative to its modest base. In the predominantly Hindu province of Bali, by contrast, Jokowi's vote shares increased substantially. Similar patterns are visible in other largely Christian provinces like East Nusa Tenggara and North Sulawesi. This evidence is consistent with a hardening of a religious cleavage across the country: Prabowo's campaign appealed to Muslims, and Jokowi's to non-Muslims.
Some other details jump out when looking across provinces. Jokowi did well in 2014 in South Sulawesi, home of Vice President Jusuf Kalla . Kalla did not stand for reelection in 2019, and Jokowi's reversal in that province in 2019 is stark. Also apparent is the decline in support for Jokowi in Riau, the home province of Prabowo's 2019 vice presidential candidate Sandiaga Uno .
But the most important provinces to note are Central and East Java.[1] These are provinces with large Muslim majorities where Jokowi performed well in 2014, but he has performed even better in 2019. The obvious explanation is that these provinces, along with Yogyakarta, are overwhelmingly Javanese. Compare, for example, Jokowi's performance in East/Central Java to his performance in West Java, where Javanese are an ethnic minority. This correlation even holds within East Java: Jokowi fared worst in the districts on Madura , where Madurese are the majority ethnic group.[2]
Religious and Ethnic Cleavages
To visualize the relationship between religion and support for Jokowi more clearly, we can compare Jokowi votes share and each district's Muslim population share using demographic data available from IPUMS-International . Here is what that looks like, both in 2014 (left) and 2019 (right). The red lines are lowess fits that predict the relationship between the two variables.
Clearly, Muslim-minority districts have voted overwhelmingly for Jokowi. This is quite apparent in provinces like North Sumatra, where we observe a growing split between predominantly Christian districts that support Jokowi, and predominantly Muslim ones that supported Prabowo. It is also true in the otherwise heavily Muslim province of South Sulawesi, where the majority Catholic Torajan districts bucked the trend identified previously. But among Muslim-majority districts, there is wide variation in Jokowi support. This reflects the differences between Muslim Aceh and Muslim Java. Comparing both the spread around the lowess fit line for 2014 and 2019 and the increasingly steep fit in 2019, moreover, we discover that the relationship between religion and support for Jokowi is stronger in 2019 than it was in 2014. The correlation between Muslim population share and opposition to Jokowi also seems to repeat itself across Indonesia's regions.
Altogether, these patterns in the data are consistent with a growing cleavage between Muslims and non-Muslims alongside an ethnic cleavage between Javanese and non-Javanese.
We can further investigate the importance of the Javanese/non-Javanese cleavage by looking to the places where Jokowi's vote share increased relative to 2019. The next figure examines Jokowi's vote share in 2019 (left) and his increase in support (or "swing") from 2014 to 2019, comparing Javanese-majority districts versus all others.
Not only did Jokowi win in nearly every Javanese-majority district in 2019, he also improve on his 2014 performance in nearly every Javanese-majority district.
Identity versus Development
Do these patterns reflect something else besides religion and ethnic identity? Perhaps Jokowi also appealed more to poor, rural, or isolated voters in the economically lagging parts of the outer islands. And perhaps Prabowo's appeal lay with the relatively prosperous segments of Indonesian society, the urban middle classes in particular.  We need individual level voting behavior to test these hypotheses, and that is unfortunately not available. But we can nevertheless test whether these patterns appear in the aggregate data as ecological correlations by running a simple regression that predicts 2019 JA share as a function of 2014 JK share, total turnout (a coarse measure of district population), district-level demographic variables (% Muslim, % Javanese, and ethnic fractionalization calculated as ELF ), an index of average household material development, and an index of district urbanization, as well as province fixed effects (omitted from the presentation below). All of these data are available from IPUMS, as with the data on religion and ethnicity that I used above. To test whether the effect of Muslim population share varies by demographic or development indicators, additional models allow this variable to interact with these variables.
##  ## ============================================================================================================================== ##                                                                    2019 Jokowi-Amin vote share                                 ##                                     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ##                                            (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)        ## ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ## % Javanese                               0.206***            0.071           0.206***          0.221***          0.211***      ##                                          (0.025)            (0.167)           (0.024)           (0.026)           (0.026)      ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim                                -0.408***          -0.412***         -0.408***         -0.280*** -0.384***     ##                                          (0.047)            (0.045)           (0.047)           (0.043)           (0.043)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Ethnic Fractionalization                  -0.022            -0.018            -0.021            -0.033            -0.030       ##                                          (0.030)            (0.031)           (0.045)           (0.031)           (0.031)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Development                               -0.003            -0.002            -0.003             0.009            -0.009       ##                                          (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.007)      ##                                                                                                                                ## % Urban                                   -0.016            -0.015            -0.016             0.012           0.108***      ##                                          (0.016)            (0.017)           (0.016)           (0.021)           (0.021)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Turnout                                   -0.000            -0.000            -0.000            -0.000            -0.000       ##                                          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)      ##                                                                                                                                ## Jokowi Share 2014                        0.563***          0.563***          0.563***          0.567***          0.564***      ##                                          (0.093)            (0.093)           (0.093)           (0.095)           (0.095)      ##                                                                                                                                ## % Javanese * % Muslim                                        0.142                                                             ##                                                             (0.165)                                                            ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim * Ethnic Fractionalization                                           -0.002                                           ##                                                                               (0.062)                                          ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim * Development                                                                         -0.033**                        ##                                                                                                 (0.010)                        ##                                                                                                                                ## % Muslim * % Urban                                                                                               -0.136***     ##                                                                                                                   (0.010)      ##                                                                                                                                ## ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ## Observations                               490                490               490               490               490        ## Adjusted R2 0.923              0.923             0.923             0.925             0.925       ## ============================================================================================================================== ## Note:                                                                                            *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001 ##                                         OLS with province fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors clustered by province.
These results comprise fairly strong evidence that Jokowi did systematically better in 2019—net of his 2014 performance—the greater the Javanese population share, and worse the greater the Muslim population share. No other demographic or development variable appears to predict how well Jokowi performed.[3] There is also only limited evidence that the relationship between Muslim population share and Jokowi support differs substantially based on any other factors; see, for example, the marginal effects of Muslim population share across the range of district urbanization (plot is via interflex ).
The negative correlation between Muslim population share and Jokowi-Amin vote share in 2019 is higher in the most urbanized tercile of districts than in the least urbanized districts (p = 0.0271), but that is about all that we can conclude.
National versus Regional Factors
In analyzing district electoral results this way, the goal is to balance specificity and generality. In principle it could be possible to explain fully the pattern in results across Indonesia with reference to a small number of national factors. But reality will always be more complicated than that, with local and regional factors playing a role that will be nearly impossible to capture using a statistical approach such as this one.
As a final step in the analysis, we can return to the list of provinces above to see whether these differences can be fully explained with reference to religious and ethnic cleavages. To do so, I plot the province fixed effects from the first regression model, with Jakarta (where Jokowi and Prabowo performed about equally) as the baseline category. We can interpret these results as the difference by province in Jokowi's performance relative to Jakarta, and adjusting for the district characteristics listed above.
Accounting for religion helps to explain the results for provinces like Bali and East Nusa Tenggara, and accounting for ethnicity helps to explain the results for Yogyakarta, but even so there is more to explore in provinces like Aceh, Gorontalo, and West Sumatra. These are provinces where something more than Indonesia's emerging national cleavage structure of Muslim/non-Muslim and Javanese/non-Javanese is at play.
NOTES
[1] Some of the East Java data were taken from KawalPemilu due to problems with the original KPU site.
[2] I have no explanation for his relative success in Bangkalan, also a Madurese-majority district on Madura.
[3] In results not reported here, I've used a lasso regression approach to sort through all pairwise interactions of predictors in search of good predictors of JA vote share. The lasso selects Muslim population share as well as Javanese population share interacted with a range of other variables.
Share this:
Still, the protesters are a minority among the country's 193 million registered voters .
A hashtag condemning the violence, #TidakAtasNamaSaya, which translates to "Not in My Name", has gone viral on social media as moderate Indonesians speak out against the rioters.
And there is a clear distinction between those who came with violent intent, and those who rallied to pray and peacefully protest against the election result.
Photo: Ahmed Sudirwan was among those who took to the streets in protest after the election. (ABC News: David Lipson)
A journalist who said he used to work for the BBC, Ahmed Sudirwan, quit his job three days ago to take part in the rallies.
"I have come to this realisation, actually my conscience, that we Indonesians must stand up," he told the ABC.
"We are telling the world, we Indonesians are loving people but we know this is our country and we must stand up for our country."
He said he wasn't looking for trouble. But he also demonstrated a disconnect with the violent reality raging in his streets, claiming there had been "no violence" committed by the protesters.
When the ABC put to him that we had seen and filmed protesters throwing stones at police he claimed they were merely unknown "provocateurs".
"Provocateurs can be anyone. Don't ask us. Ask the policemen," he said.
The rumour that police were responsible for sparking these riots was just one of many that prompted authorities to limit the sharing of photos and videos on social media.
Jakarta on alert as protests after election loss turn violent
Indonesian police say situation turned ugly when some protesters refused to leave and began throwing Molotov cocktails.
22 May 2019 07:26 GMT
Police in Indonesia  fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse demonstrators in central Jakarta after supporters of losing presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto began setting fire to buildings and vehicles and pelted officers with rocks and burning objects.
Indonesian National Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said protests against the final results of last month's presidential election, which showed Prabowo losing to incumbent President Joko Widodo , turned violent late on Tuesday and continued into the early hours of Wednesday.
Police are investigating reports that at least one person was killed in the disturbances, but Dedi denied live rounds had been used.
"We are still checking, but I need to reiterate that police officers were not equipped with live bullets," he told reporters, according to the AFP news agency.
Local media on Wednesday reported six people had been killed, citing Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan who visited city hospitals in the morning. He said 200 people had been injured. The governor's office did not answer calls seeking comment from Al Jazeera, nor did the police spokesman.
Earlier, he said that dozens of people had been detained.
Kompas TV, an Indonesian news channel, showed protesters throwing rocks, facing off against hundreds of riot police in a neighbourhood in the centre of the capital.
Prabowo, a retired general who has been accused of human rights abuses, has claimed widespread cheating in the April 17 election but has provided no credible evidence to back up his allegations.
The legal director of his campaign team said on Tuesday that Prabowo would lodge a formal challenge to the result with the Constitutional Court.
Later on Wednesday, Indonesia's chief security minister said social media would be partially blocked to prevent the spread of hoaxes following the violence in Jakarta.
"To avoid provocations, the spread of fake news through the community, we will limit access to certain features on social media," said Wiranto, who uses one name.
Protesters clash with police in Jakarta, [Sigid Kurniawan/Antara Foto via Reuters]
Rising tension
Several thousand people on Tuesday took to the streets around the office of the General Elections Commission after the agency confirmed Widodo had won a second presidential term with 55.5 percent of the vote, compared with 44.5 percent for Prabowo.
Those protests ended peacefully, but the situation turned ugly when some demonstrators refused to leave the area.
190521053354338
Jakarta police responded when protesters threw rocks, Molotov cocktails and burning objects, spokesman Argo Yuwono said. Earlier, some people had set some stalls on fire.
Al Jazeera's Florence Looi, reporting from Jakarta, said the clashes went on for several hours, but the streets of the capital were largely calm on Wednesday morning.
Protesters were expected to return in the afternoon.
Prabowo has until Friday to lodge his appeal with the Constitutional Court. It then has 14 days from the time it receives all the evidence to make a decision.
"It's worth remembering that international observers have said the elections were largely free and fair, even though Prabowo alleges widespread cheating," Looi said.
"Some analysts have even said that because Widodo won by an 11 percentage point difference - which translates some 17 million votes - this undermines Prabowo and the opposition's argument that the elections were rigged."
More than 30,000 troops have been deployed across the capital amid reports of protests after the publication of the official election results.
Tensions have also increased since police said last week that they had arrested dozens of suspects linked to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL or ISIS) who had planned to cause chaos by bombing post-election demonstrations.
Additional reporting by Febriana Firdaus in Jakarta
SOURCE: Al Jazeera and news agencies
IndonesiaSecurity
May 27, 2019
Indonesian anti-riot police secure an area from protesters during a demonstration against Indonesia's President Joko Widodo's victory in the recent election in Jakarta on May 22, 2019. Photo: AFP/Bay Ismoyo
Post-mortem anatomy of Indonesia's deadly riots
Jakarta's May 22 riots, despite seven protester deaths, underscored both much improved police work and extremist risks ahead
ByJohn McBeth, Jakarta
Despite the apparent shooting deaths of seven demonstrators under still unexplained circumstances, Indonesia's much-maligned national police is receiving well-deserved praise for its disciplined handling of last week's election-related riots in Jakarta.
While that will do little to change the overall image of the 440,000-strong force as corrupt and inept, in specific areas such as crowd control and counterterrorism it has made significant strides as guardians of the country's internal security.
Improved crowd-control techniques, including the use of policewomen in frontline positions, have been taught at Indonesia's police academy since the early 2000s when the United States began focusing part of its aid program on that area of law enforcement.
The police, which unlike the military report directly to President Joko Widodo, have also benefited from new riot-control equipment, their own home-made pepper spray and an increased budget, which last year amounted to US$6.6 billion, compared with the military's $8.1 billion.
For some, the spectacle of two New Order-era generals, losing presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto and Widodo's chief political minister Wiranto, facing off against each other looked like a depressing rerun of the chaotic events that preceded president Suharto's fall from power.
A protester shows sharp bullets found in police cars after clashes over presidential election results turned into riots in Jakarta on May 22. Photo: AFP / Nurphoto/ Aditya Irawan
Certainly, the mysterious deaths of six rioters the night before the May 22 protest was a disturbing reminder of the sniper shooting of students at Trisakti University, which triggered the anti-Suharto riots that devastated Jakarta in May 1998.
Ominously, police reportedly recovered two M4 rifles fitted with silencers from the scene, weapons only carried by Indonesian special forces units, adding to concerns about a possible conspiracy.
But there were distinct differences from 20 years ago, even if Indonesia continues to be haunted by the authoritarian shadow of Suharto and dogged by many of the same figures from that era who have populated the political stage since his demise.
Wiranto's role this time was nominal, with government sources confirming that most of the security planning was left to police chief Tito Karnavian, a Western-educated officer well versed in modern policing methods and in counterterrorism operations.
It was Information Minister Rudiantara, however, who made the decision to shut down WhatsApp, Twitter and Facebook at a crucial juncture on May 22, apparently worried about the volume of fake news and messages exploding across social media.
Inadvertently, the censorship order may also have succeeded in preventing unidentified provocateurs in the crowd from communicating with one another or outside masterminds in efforts to escalate the violence.
Indonesian presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto speaks to supporters after the presidential election in Jakarta on April 19. Photo: AFP Forum via NurPhoto/Andrew Gal
After months of threatening a "people's power" uprising if the presidential election results didn't go his way, Prabowo sought to play peacemaker when the inevitable riots broke out and fears grew the situation could get out of hand.
If anything, the long-contrived crisis allowed security forces plenty of time to prepare, starting with the establishment of roadblocks to turn around busloads of pro-Prabowo supporters on the toll roads leading into the capital.
Paramilitary police and troops flew in from Sumatra and other parts of the country, including a full marine battalion airlifted aboard a fleet of seven C-130 transport aircraft from their base in the East Java port city of Surabaya.
Some took up positions out of sight in the basements of buildings along Jalan Thamrin, a main thoroughfare and the site of the General Election Supervisory Agency (Bawaslu), the main focus of the demonstrators, whose numbers didn't come remotely close to the promised hundreds of thousands.
Police have still to come up with an explanation of the circumstances surrounding the deaths of the six demonstrators after the fire-bombing of a police dormitory sparked street battles in the market district of Tanah Abang.
Police announced days beforehand that their men would not be carrying live rounds, but the rubber bullets they did have can still be lethal at short range. Only two of the victims have been identified and it is not clear what the autopsies have revealed.
Police say that among the 257 people detained were two alleged militants linked to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), bringing to 31 the number of terrorist suspects arrested in Jakarta and other parts of Java in the days beforehand.
Police in front of the Indonesia Election Supervisory Agency, the target of pro-Prabowo riots on May 22, 2019 in Jakarta. Photo: AFP / NurPhoto / Donal Husni
According to investigators, precursor explosive materials discovered during the raids were to be used in a bombing campaign against targets in other parts of the city, using the demonstrations as a convenient cover.
The day after the riots, Widodo dispatched Vice-President Jusuf Kalla to meet with Prabowo, who has now changed his mind and taken his election-fraud complaint to the Constitutional Court – as he did after his failed election bid five years ago.
The president's 11-percentage-point margin of victory this time, much wider than in 2014, gives the retired general's legal challenge little chance of succeeding, particularly if he is unable to provide a lot more compelling evidence that he has mustered so far.
Officials say the meeting was aimed at clearing the air, but Prabowo is looking increasingly like a sore loser, with his political allies in the National Mandate (PAN) and Justice and Prosperity (PKS) parties seemingly uninterested in taking things further.
Even the conservative 212 Movement and its hardline Islamic allies have been strangely quiet since the country's two mass Muslim organizations, Nahdlatul Ulama and Muhammadiyah, in effect banned their members from participating in the May 22 demonstrations.
But its campaign of creeping Islamization, aimed at turning secular Indonesia into an Islamic state, will almost certainly continue as security officials sweep up the ashes of the Jakarta riots and Widodo gears up for his second elected term.
Media playback is unsupported on your device
Media captionTear gas fired as Indonesia protest turns violent
Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies in Jakarta against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
Indonesian police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated.
The national police chief has denied his officers used live ammunition.
Police fired tear gas at protesters when clashes broke out again in the capital on Wednesday.
Protesters hurled fireworks and rocks at police during a stand-off near the election supervisory agency, while clashes also restarted in other areas of the city.
Social media has been restricted in some areas to stop rumours spreading.
The protests erupted after official election results showed Mr Widodo had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto at the polls last month.
How have the authorities responded?
National police chief Tito Karnavian said some of the six dead appeared to have gunshot wounds and others "blunt force wounds".
The authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous". They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
President Widodo has promised firm action against rioters.
"I open myself to anyone to work together to build and develop this nation, but I won't tolerate anyone who tries to disrupt public security, the democratic process or the unity of our... country," the president said at a press briefing.
How did the protests start?
Protests in the capital Jakarta  began peacefully on Tuesday but soon turned violent, with cars set on fire and firecrackers thrown at police.
Police in riot gear fired tear gas to disperse the crowd.
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Indonesian men jeer at police as protests continue in Jakarta on Wednesday
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Cars were found badly burned
The country's General Election Commission confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Widodo had won the presidency, taking 55.5% of votes.
Mr Prabowo rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission dismissed his claims.
The ex-general also lost against Mr Widodo at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
Did an election kill 500 people?
More than 192 million people were eligible to vote in the presidential and general elections that took place on 17 April.
After the official results were announced on Tuesday, thousands gathered in front of the election supervisory building in support of Mr Prabowo, but later moved on to other areas across Jakarta after police urged the crowd to disperse, according to BBC Indonesian.
Image copyright EPA
Image caption Protesters hurl missiles towards police during renewed clashes on Wednesday
Local TV stations showed several standoffs between protesters and police in parts of the city.
More than 30,000 troops had been deployed in Jakarta in anticipation of potential violence.
Mr Prabowo repeated calls for supporters to protest peacefully.
"We support people's constitutional rights [to protest] as long as they are civilised, peaceful and non-violent," he told reporters.
On Wednesday, chief security minister Wiranto, who uses just a single name, said access to social media would be blocked in some areas.
The restrictions - including on photo and video sharing - aimed to control the spread of misinformation, he said.
Related Topics
Media playback is unsupported on your device
Media captionTear gas fired as Indonesia protest turns violent
Six people have been killed and 200 injured during mass rallies in Jakarta against the re-election of Indonesian President Joko Widodo.
Indonesian police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated.
The national police chief has denied his officers used live ammunition.
Police fired tear gas at protesters when clashes broke out again in the capital on Wednesday.
Protesters hurled fireworks and rocks at police during a stand-off near the election supervisory agency, while clashes also restarted in other areas of the city.
Social media has been restricted in some areas to stop rumours spreading.
The protests erupted after official election results showed Mr Widodo had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto at the polls last month.
How have the authorities responded?
National police chief Tito Karnavian said some of the six dead appeared to have gunshot wounds and others "blunt force wounds".
The authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous". They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
President Widodo has promised firm action against rioters.
"I open myself to anyone to work together to build and develop this nation, but I won't tolerate anyone who tries to disrupt public security, the democratic process or the unity of our... country," the president said at a press briefing.
How did the protests start?
Protests in the capital Jakarta  began peacefully on Tuesday but soon turned violent, with cars set on fire and firecrackers thrown at police.
Police in riot gear fired tear gas to disperse the crowd.
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Indonesian men jeer at police as protests continue in Jakarta on Wednesday
Image copyright Reuters
Image caption Cars were found badly burned
The country's General Election Commission confirmed on Tuesday that Mr Widodo had won the presidency, taking 55.5% of votes.
Mr Prabowo rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission dismissed his claims.
The ex-general also lost against Mr Widodo at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
Did an election kill 500 people?
More than 192 million people were eligible to vote in the presidential and general elections that took place on 17 April.
After the official results were announced on Tuesday, thousands gathered in front of the election supervisory building in support of Mr Prabowo, but later moved on to other areas across Jakarta after police urged the crowd to disperse, according to BBC Indonesian.
Image copyright EPA
Image caption Protesters hurl missiles towards police during renewed clashes on Wednesday
Local TV stations showed several standoffs between protesters and police in parts of the city.
More than 30,000 troops had been deployed in Jakarta in anticipation of potential violence.
Mr Prabowo repeated calls for supporters to protest peacefully.
"We support people's constitutional rights [to protest] as long as they are civilised, peaceful and non-violent," he told reporters.
On Wednesday, chief security minister Wiranto, who uses just a single name, said access to social media would be blocked in some areas.
The restrictions - including on photo and video sharing - aimed to control the spread of misinformation, he said.
Related Topics
We've detected unusual activity from your computer network
To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.
Why did this happen?
Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy .
Need Help?
For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.
Block reference ID:
Share via E-Mail
Bookmark
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said.
More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district.
Advertisement
Advertisement
The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name.
The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammad Aidi said.
Four soldiers guarding a nearby military post tried to control the protesters but were outnumbered, and one of the officers tried to control the mob by opening fire into the air, Aidi said.
"The mob became even more brutal and attacked the officer, in a such threatening situation another officer was forced to open fire and retreat to the post to save themselves," Aidi said in a statement Monday (May 27).
Advertisement
Advertisement
Four people, including the teenager, were shot dead while one more was injured and has been treated at a local hospital.
The military, local police and the human rights commission have formed a team to investigate the case, Aidi said.
Indonesia's presidential and legislative election also triggered a riot in the capital Jakarta.
Supporters of presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto have been protesting since the election result was announced last week in favour of incumbent president Joko Widodo.
Subianto's supporters claim the election was marred by rampant electoral fraud.
Since the rioting, more than 400 demonstrators have been arrested, according to police, who blamed the violence on "provocateurs" they claimed mixed with the crowd to stir up trouble.
Police said seven demonstrators have died but offered few details on how they died or who was responsible, though earlier said some had gunshot and blunt force wounds.
About 900 people were injured in the riots, according to the Jakarta Health Agency.
Source: AFP/nh
Indonesia police allege plot to kill top officials
by The Associated Press
Posted May 28, 2019 1:03 am PDT
JAKARTA, Indonesia — Indonesian police say four senior officials, including two Cabinet ministers and the national spy chief, were targeted for assassination as part of a plot possibly linked to last week's post-election riots.
National Police chief Tito Karnavian told a news conference Tuesday that details of the plot were obtained from interrogations of arrested rioters.
Seven people died in two nights of rioting last week in Jakarta after official election results confirmed that President Joko Widodo had won a second term. Police say the riots, which broke out during peaceful protests, were planned.
Karnavian said the officials targeted for assassination included top security minister Wiranto, who uses a single name, and his predecessor, Luhut Binsar Panjaitan, who is currently maritime minister.
The Associated Press
Jakarta governor says six dead in Indonesia post-election unrest
Published Wed, May 22 2019 1:55 AM EDT
Key Points
Six people died in civil unrest that gripped parts of Jakarta on Tuesday night after the election commission confirmed that President Joko Widodo won last month's election, the governor of the Indonesian capital said.
News agency Antara reported that a small number of protesters had attempted to storm a nearby police station and were using tables as barricades.
The General Election Commission (KPU) on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters in the April 17 election, which gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for former general Prabowo Subianto.
Police fired tear gas during a clash with protesters in Jakarta, Indonesia on Wednesday 22 May 2019.
Eko Siswono Toyudho | Anadolu Agency | Getty Images
Six people died in civil unrest that gripped parts of Jakarta on Tuesday night after the election commission confirmed that President Joko Widodo won last month's election, the governor of the Indonesian capital said.
Protests on Tuesday by supporters of Widodo's challenger for the presidency, former general Prabowo Subianto, started peacefully but turned violent in the evening, forcing police to fire tear gas to disperse the crowd.
"As per 9 o'clock this morning, there were 200 people hurt being brought to five hospitals," Governor Anies Baswedan told broadcaster TVOne. "The number of people dead was six."
He said hospitals were conducting post-mortems to determine the cause of the deaths.
Hundreds of protesters were still locked in a tense stand-off with police in central Jakarta on Wednesday after a night of violence. Television footage showed smoke billowing from behind dozens of protesters in streets of the Tanah Abang district, with some throwing firecrackers and tearing down public fences.
News agency Antara reported that a small number of protesters had attempted to storm a nearby police station and were using tables as barricades.
Several office buildings and embassies in downtown Jakarta were closed on Wednesday, as were train stations in the area.
A separate crowd in front of the election supervisory body threw rocks and firecrackers at police around dawn, and dozens of chanting protesters joined them during the morning.
Hundreds of police in riot gear blocked the usually busy Sarinah intersection to hold back a crowd they said was expected to swell further in the afternoon.
"We will keep going with these protests until he (Widodo) falls," said Afi Sikumbang, 58, a Prabowo supporter.
The General Election Commission (KPU) on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters in the April 17 election, which gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for Prabowo.
Widodo won more than 85 million votes of a total of 154 million cast in the world's third-largest democracy, but Prabowo told reporters he believed there had been widespread cheating.
The retired general pledged he would "continue to make legal efforts in line with the constitution to defend the mandate of the people", with his legal director stating the campaign planned to contest the result in the Constitutional Court.
On Monday, an election supervisory agency dismissed claims of systematic cheating, citing a lack of evidence. Independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Widodo was congratulated for winning the election by former president and Democratic Party chairman Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, who is part of the coalition backing Prabowo.
The National Mandate Party (PAN), which is also part of the Prabowo coalition, has also acknowledged the results of the election, which are being rejected by Prabowo's Great Indonesia Movement (Gerindra).
Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko told reporters on Wednesday he believed there was "a systematic effort by a certain group, outside of the terrorist group, that is riding on the situation to muddy the situation", adding that authorities have seized two pistols from people involved in riots.
"We know who is behind this, it is a matter of time," he said, adding that security was under control.
Escalation
Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo told Reuters on Wednesday that Indonesian police had arrested at least 20 people for provoking the riots and were checking on reports of casualties.
He stressed that security officers on the ground, which include military personnel, were not equipped with live bullets.
News website Tirto reported a man died of bullet wounds in Tanah Abang, quoting a doctor at a hospital near the site.
Indonesian authorities say 40,000 police and army personnel are on duty across Jakarta to maintain security.
Australia, the United States, and Britain issued travel advisories warning of an increased risk of violence across Indonesia and advising citizens to stay away from protests.
The Indonesian rupiah fell 0.2% on Wednesday. The main stock index gained as much as 0.3% earlier in the session but gave up its gains to trade 0.2% lower.
Related Tags
Six dead in post-election clashes in Indonesia | DW News - latest news and breaking stories | DW | 22.05.2019
We use cookies to improve our service for you. You can find more information in our data protection declaration.
Email
JAKARTA, Indonesia – Indonesian police say four senior officials, including two Cabinet ministers and the national spy chief, were targeted for assassination as part of a plot possibly linked to last week's post-election riots.
National Police chief Tito Karnavian told a news conference Tuesday that details of the plot were obtained from interrogations of arrested rioters.
Seven people died in two nights of rioting last week in Jakarta after official election results confirmed that President Joko Widodo had won a second term. Police say the riots, which broke out during peaceful protests, were planned.
Karnavian said the officials targeted for assassination included top security minister Wiranto, who uses a single name, and his predecessor, Luhut Binsar Panjaitan, who is currently maritime minister.
Trending in World
By subscribing with Google you will be billed at a price in your local currency.
MyFT – track the topics most important to you
FT Weekend – full access to the weekend content
Mobile & Tablet Apps – download to read on the go
Gift Article – share up to 10 articles a month with family, friends and colleagues
Read more
Indonesia: Post-election rally planned in Jakarta April 19 /update 3
Indonesia: Post-election rally planned in Jakarta April 19 /update 3
Presidential challenger Prabowo Subianto to hold post-election rally in Jakarta April 19; heightened security measures and transportation disruptions expected
18 Apr 09:48 PM UTC
TIMEFRAME expected from 4/18/2019, 12:00 AM until 4/20/2019, 11:59 PM (Asia/Jakarta). COUNTRY/REGION Jakarta
Warning Security Transportation Indonesia
Event
The campaign team of presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto is slated to hold a post-election rally in Jakarta on Friday, April 19, in support of Prabawo's presidential bid and to "celebrate" a peaceful election. The demonstration is set to begin at approximately 19:30 (local time),  following Friday prayers, at the National Monument . As of Thursday, April 17, Jakarta police officials indicated it had had not been informed of any planned demonstrations by the Prabowo team.
Heightened security measures and transportation disruptions are to be expected on Friday in central Jakarta. Clashes between rival political groups or with security forces cannot be ruled out.  
Context
The rally will follow the April 17 election in which incumbent President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo faced Gerindra party candidate Prabowo Subianto; early exit polls show Jokowi has a lead of 10 percentage points. The Prabowo camp subsequently disputed the results citing "widespread cheating" across the country and claimed the Gerindra party candidate won with 62 percent of the vote. Official results will be published in May. 
The Indonesian general elections on were held on April 17, during which voters cast their ballots to vote for president, vice president, and legislative representatives. Incumbent President Joko Widodo, also known as Jokowi, of the PDI-P faced challenger Gerindra party candidate Prabowo Subianto, a retired general who previously ran in 2014. Jokowi selected Nahdlatul Ulama leader Ma'ruf Amin as his running mate and Prabowo's vice presidential candidate is Jakarta Deputy Governor Sandiaga Uno.
Advice
Individuals in Jakarta are advised to monitor developments to the situation, anticipate heightened security measures and crowded conditions, avoid all public gatherings as a precaution, avoid discussing political topics in public or on social media, and adhere to all instructions issued by local authorities.
 
Copyright and Disclaimer
GardaWorld is the owner or licensee of all intellectual property rights in the material presented on this website. All such rights are reserved. The use of this website and its material is subject to the Terms of Use and accordingly you must not use any content from this website for commercial or other analogous purposes without our consent, including but not limited to any deep-linking or framing in order to copy, distribute, display or monitor any portion of the website. If you have any questions or are interested in distributing any content from this website, Contact us for more details.
Related news
Indonesia Post-Election National Survey 2014
Publication Date: 
Survey Charts-English (PDF)
The International Foundation for Electoral Systems (IFES) has been active in Indonesia since 1998. Through its national electoral surveys, IFES has provided previously unavailable data for all stakeholders to gauge the level of public preparedness for electoral participation and public perceptions of the electoral process. The most recent of these electoral surveys, conducted in June 2014 in partnership with the Lembaga Survei Institute (LSI) , captures the public opinion of Indonesian voters following the April 2014 legislative elections and leading up to the 2014 presidential elections. According to the survey, the majority of Indonesians profess satisfaction with the conduct of the April 2014 elections, while several findings from the survey point to areas which can still be strengthened toward a more effective and credible election process in Indonesia. Key findings from the survey include:
Survey Methodology
LSI conducted fieldwork for the survey from June 1 to 10, 2014. The base national sample for the survey consisted of 2,009 interviews in 33 provinces of Indonesia. Additional over-sample interviews were also conducted in selected provinces (Aceh, Maluku, Papua and West Papua). Information in this report is based on weighted data that is representative of the national population of Indonesia. The margin of error for the national sample is plus/minus 2.3%.
The electoral process of the April 9, 2009 legislative elections
• Eighty-two percent of Indonesians are very or somewhat satisfied with the overall voting process and procedures for the legislative elections.
• Eighty-eight percent say that the legislative elections were very or somewhat well-organized, and 80% rate the election as having been free and fair. A majority of Indonesians in all regions of the country hold these views.
• When asked to compare the organization of the 2014 legislative elections with the organization of the 2009 legislative elections, 31% say that the 2014 elections were better-organized and 52% say they had the same level of organization. Only 12% said that the 2014 elections were not as well organized.
Administration of the electoral process at the polling station level
• Seventy-eight percent of Indonesians surveyed rate the performance of polling station offices as "very good" or "good," while 78% have the same opinion of the village election committees.
• Forty-four percent of voters responding to the survey say that polling station officials did not check their Resident Identity Card (KTP) at the polling station and 75% say that their finger was not cleaned for ink residue before the ballot was cast.
• While most respondents think that election results are accurate, a significant percentage of Indonesians (26%) believe that manipulation of election results occurred at some polling stations in the country.
Dissemination of information on the electoral process
• Seventy-seven percent of voters are satisfied with the General Election Commission's (KPU) work in informing and educating voters about the election process, 74% are satisfied with its effort to ensure that election results are accurate and reflect how Indonesians voted, 74% are also satisfied with the KPU's work in compiling and establishing the voter's list, and 67% are satisfied with its ability to maintain independence from political pressures.
• Sixty-seven percent of Indonesians report that they saw voter information messages in the period leading up to the legislative elections.
• Forty-seven percent of Indonesians say that the KPU's materials were the most informative way for them to learn about the election process, and the survey finds that 74% of Indonesians saw at least one of the messages that the KPU produced to inform voters about the election process.
• Only 20% of regular users of the internet say that they used the KPU website and only 10% say that they received information from social media.
The role of money in the electoral process
• When asked to compare the prevalence of money politics in the 2014 election compared to the 2009 election, 34% of Indonesians say that money politics was more prevalent in the 2014 election than in 2009, and only 10% take the opposite view.
• Despite the fact that survey respondents are often reluctant to report taking part in activities that may be illegal or unethical, 15% of Indonesians say that they were offered money or other rewards in exchange for their votes during the legislative election campaign, and 5% report that someone they know was offered a reward. Twenty-nine percent of Indonesians report that a legislative candidate built facilities, repaired roads, or paid for other services for their community in the lead-up to the legislative elections.
Participation of women as candidates in elections in Indonesia
• Of the Indonesians who report voting for candidates in legislative races in the April elections, only 9% report voting for a woman in the House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat, DPR) election, 9% in the DPR Provinsi election, 12% in the DPR Kabupaten/Kota election, and 14% in the Regional Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Daerah, DPD) election. 
Preferences for candidates or parties  
• In the DPR election, 45% report voting for candidates only compared to 27% who voted for parties only, and 23% who voted for both the party and a candidate from the same party. In the case of the provincial DPR, nearly half (48%) voted for a candidate only, 24% for party only, and 21% for a party and candidate from same party. In the case of the DPR Kabupaten/Kota, these figures were 52%, 17%, and 23%, respectively.  
While identifying possible areas for improvement such as the training of polling station officials, the effectiveness of websites and social media as vehicles for voter-information dissemination, and societal resistance to voting for women, this survey suggests that, overall, Indonesians have positive assessments of the 2014 legislative election process. The KPU and electoral bodies at all levels of the electoral process are also rated positively by Indonesian voters for their performance during the legislative elections.
Downloads
You are using an older browser version. Please use a supported version for the best MSN experience.
Indonesia plunges into post-election unrest
By By Dave Lucas, Reuters of Reuters |
< PREVIOUS SLIDE SLIDE 1 of 30 NEXT SLIDE >
Protesters clash with the police downtown in Thamrin, Jakarta, Indonesia. Antara Foto/Muhammad Adimaja/via REUTERS
© Thomson Reuters, LLC

Asia Pacific |Indonesia Police Allege Plot to Kill Top Officials
Advertisement
Indonesia Police Allege Plot to Kill Top Officials
By The Associated Press
May 28, 2019
JAKARTA, Indonesia — Four top Indonesian officials, including two Cabinet ministers and the national spy chief, were targeted for assassination as part of a plot possibly linked to last week's election riots, police said Tuesday.
National police chief Tito Karnavian told reporters that details of the plot were obtained from interrogations of six arrested individuals.
Seven people died in two nights of rioting last week in Jakarta after official election results confirmed that President Joko Widodo had won a second term. Police say the riots, which broke out during peaceful protests by supporters of the losing candidate Prabowo Subianto, were planned.
The rioting followed an election that highlighted Muslim-majority Indonesia's religious divides. Subianto, who allied himself with groups that want Islamic law to replace secular government, won heavily in conservative provinces but was defeated nationally by Widodo's coalition of moderate and minority voters.
Karnavian said the officials targeted for assassination included top security minister Wiranto, who uses a single name, and his predecessor, Luhut Binsar Panjaitan, who is currently maritime minister and seen as close to Widodo.
The two others were National Intelligence Agency chief Budi Gunawan and the head of the presidential special staff for intelligence and security, Gories Mere. A fifth person, the head of an opinion polling company, was also a target, Karnavian said, without naming the person.
"We have arrested all the perpetrators who were ordered to carry out the executions, we have also confiscated four weapons, and we are developing the mastermind who gave the order to them who will be legally processed shortly," Karnavian said at a joint news conference with Wiranto.
The security minister said the assassination plot aimed to instill fear in the officials and weaken the government.
Subianto, a former special forces general linked to past human rights abuses in Indonesia, has refused to accept results of the April 17 election. He has alleged massive fraud but provided no convincing evidence. His campaign team filed a legal challenge to the result at the Constitutional Court on Friday.
Separately, local media reported that an American man who is a longtime resident of Indonesia has been arrested for spreading hoaxes online. In a YouTube video, the man says he's a Subianto supporter and claims communists are infiltrating Indonesian society, a frequent allegation of hard-line Widodo critics.
On Monday, national police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal said police had seized two bullet-proof vests with "Police" written on them, imitating official police gear, a rifle modified to hold a scope, along with two guns similar to those issued by the Indonesian military.
Iqbal said the six suspects are from a different group than the alleged militants arrested earlier in the month.
Before election results were announced on May 21, counterterrorism police arrested more than 30 suspected militants from Jamaah Ansharut Daulah, an Indonesian extremist group affiliated with the Islamic State group.
Iqbal said one of the six suspects was arrested at a hotel in Jakarta after participating in the riots, another was arrested at Jakarta's airport and others in locations around Jakarta and nearby Bogor.
Advertisement
Search for:
Indonesian protesters disperse after second night of post-election unrest
Riot police officers guard during a riot near the Election Supervisory Agency (Bawaslu) headquarters in Jakarta, Indonesia, May 22, 2019. REUTERS/Willy Kurniawan
May 23, 2019
By Maikel Jefriando and Wilda Asmarini
JAKARTA (Reuters) – Calm returned to the streets of the Indonesian capital on Thursday after a second night of clashes between security forces and protesters angry about the outcome of last month's election, which handed President Joko Widodo a second term.
Downtown areas of Jakarta became a battlefield overnight, with police firing tear gas and rubber bullets and protesters throwing rocks and firecrackers.
Protesters also tore up pavement slabs, destroyed street signs and set ablaze food stalls and a security post.
The unrest followed Tuesday's announcement by the General Election Commission confirming that Widodo had beaten his challenger, former general Prabowo Subianto, in the April 17 poll.
The violence began on Tuesday night with six killed, and two more killed on Wednesday night, officials said.
Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan said the dead included three teenagers, and 737 people were injured in the rioting, mostly  in the central neighborhood of Tanah Abang.
But the ranks of protesters thinned over Wednesday night and police spokesman Dedi Praseyto said the last dispersed by 7 a.m.
Roads quiet on Wednesday as office workers stayed away from the city center were busy with traffic again on Thursday. City workers in orange overalls swept up debris.
Widodo won more than 85 million of the 154 million votes cast but Prabowo has alleged "massive cheating and irregularities" and refused to concede defeat.
The election agency has said there was no evidence of systematic cheating and independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Elsewhere, a mob burnt a police station on Madura island, northeast of the main island of Java, while two police posts were set ablaze in Pontianak on Borneo island, media said.
'BENT ON CHAOS'
Financial markets were firmer on Thursday with the rupiah up 0.5% and the main stock index up 1.6%.
Taye Shim, director of capital markets at Mirae Asset Securities Indonesia, said he did not see the demonstrations as a serious threat to Indonesia's stability.
"While upset supporters might demonstrate their disagreement with the official election results, we don't think it would be a serious threat to Indonesia's democracy," he told Reuters.
Police said the number of arrests over the riots reached 300.
National police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal told reporters at least two men detained during the riots belonged to Garis, a militant group that had pledged support for Islamic State.
"They intended to carry out jihad during May 21 and 22 protests," Iqbal said.
On Wednesday he said officers had found some of the people they searched were carrying envelopes containing money, suggesting instigators behind the trouble.
"This is not a spontaneous incident, this is something by design," he told reporters. "There are indications that the mobs are paid and bent on causing chaos."
In a video on his Twitter account late on Wednesday, Prabowo urged his supporters to disperse peacefully.
"I beg you to return to your homes to rest, avoid any actions that would break the law," he said.
Prabowo's political party, Gerindra, complained that the authorities were trying to pin the blame for the riots on him.
LEGAL CHALLENGE
Gerindra spokesman Andre Rosiade said a lawsuit would be filed at the Constitutional Court on Friday over the election result, which gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for his challenger.
Prabowo lost the 2014 presidential election to Widodo by a slimmer margin and had objected to that result, lodging a complaint with the Constitutional Court that was rejected.
Analysts say Widodo's double-digit victory margin deprives the opposition of a strong case to claim rigging but it may be able to count on agitation by a strong contingent of Islamist supporters.
The government boosted the numbers of security forces to 58,000 across Jakarta and put temporary blocks on some social media to prevent unrest sparked by fake news.
Police paraded suspects in orange jumpsuits besides displaying weapons and cash at a news conference.
Police chief Tito Karnavian showed reporters a sniper rifle and two pistols he said had been seized days before the rioting.
"There is an effort to provoke, to create martyrs, blame the authorities and invoke public anger," he said.
(Additional reporting by Cindy Silviana, Bernadette Christina Munthe, Gayatri Suroyo, Kanupriya Kapoor, Fransiska Nangoy and Fanny Potkin; Writing by John Chalmers and Ed Davies; Editing by Robert Birsel and Clarence Fernandez)
﻿
Home  "  Website  "  International  "  Indonesia: 6 Killed, 200 Injured In Post-Election Protests Against President Joko Widodo's Re-Election
Indonesia: 6 Killed, 200 Injured In Post-Election Protests Against President Joko Widodo's Re-Election
The government had deployed some 50,000 police and soldiers in Jakarta, in anticipation of protests following the official election results.
A
increase text size
Outlook Web Bureau May 22, 2019 00:00 IST Indonesia: 6 Killed, 200 Injured In Post-Election Protests Against President Joko Widodo's Re-Election
outlookindia.com
2019-05-22T17:39:07+0530
At least six people were killed and 200 others injured during protests in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta, against the re-election of President Joko Widodo for a second five-year term, authorities confirmed on Wednesday.
The police confirmed the death toll based on reports from hospitals. They said the cause of the deaths was being investigated, the BBC reported.
In the protests that began peacefully on Tuesday night after election results showed, that the incumbent President had beaten his long-time rival Prabowo Subianto, soon turned violent, after demonstrators who had gathered outside the headquarters of the Elections Supervisory Agency and the General Election Commission, burned several vehicles after the police tried to disperse them with tear gas.
Some 32,000 officers are guarding the headquarters of the two election bodies, with barbed wire and riot vehicles ahead of more potential protests on Wednesday.
The rioting in Jakarta was planned and not spontaneous, according to police.
Officers found an ambulance filled with stones and some of the dozens of people arrested had envelopes of money, said national police spokesman Muhammad Iqbal. Many of those arrested and come from outside Jakarta, he said.
The government had deployed some 50,000 police and soldiers in Jakarta, in anticipation of protests following the official election results.
Many residents have left the city, and parts of the downtown are closed to traffic with the election supervisory agency and Election Commission barricaded with razor wire.
National police chief, Tito Karnavian denied that his officers had used live ammunition and called for calm.
"Some had gunshot wounds, some had blunt force wounds, but we still need to clarify this," he said, referring to the six dead, who are believed to have been killed overnight on Tuesday.
Authorities have said the protests were planned and "not spontaneous". They have suggested that a group of provocateurs may have been responsible for the violence.
"A majority of the protesters came from outside of Jakarta," said Muhammed Iqbal, a police spokesman.
The General Election Commission confirmed earlier on Tuesday, that Joko had won the presidency, taking 55.5 per cent of votes, that were cast during the April 14 polls.
Prabowo has rejected the results, alleging cheating, but the election commission has dismissed his claims, reports the BBC.
The former general also lost against Joko at the last election in 2014, and went on to unsuccessfully challenge the results.
Rudiantara, the communications and information technology minister, said features of social media including Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp will be restricted on a temporary basis to prevent the spread of hoaxes and inflammatory content.
He said messaging systems will still work for text and voice messages but photos and videos will be blocked or slowed.
Authorities have also warned of possible terror attacks and have arrested dozens of radicals who were allegedly planning attacks during the demonstrations.
(With inputs from agencies)
Galleries
Camera Icon
Indonesian anti-riot police shoot tear gas to disperse protesters during a demonstration against Indonesia's President Joko Widodo's victory.Picture: AFP
Indonesian police fire tear gas to disperse protesters after President Joko Widodo re-elected
AFPNews Corp Australia Network
Home Events Indonesia: Post election outlook
Following the Indonesian general election on 17 April 2019, this seminar will look at the ramifications for the legal, economic and political landscape over the next five years.
May 25, 2019 /  8:26 AM / 3 days ago
Indonesia lifts social media curbs targeting hoaxes during unrest
Agustinus Beo Da Costa
2 Min Read
JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesia on Saturday lifted temporary social media  restrictions that were imposed to stop online hoaxes during violence around the announcement of official election results.
Communications Ministry official Semuel Abrijani Pangerapan  told a news conference that social media had returned to normal.
The restrictions came into force on Wednesday after rioting broke out in the Indonesian capital following protests against the victory of President Joko Widodo in last month's election.
Eight people were killed and more than 900 hurt when   rallies by supporters of defeated presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto descended into violence with police firing tear gas and rubber bullets as well as using water canon to quell unrest.
Retired general Prabowo has alleged the election was rigged. The election supervisory agency has said there was no evidence of systematic cheating and independent observers have said the poll was free and fair
Authorities have blamed a rise in online hoaxes, some calling for violent post-election attacks, for inflaming tensions and brought in social media restrictions in order to prevent "provocations".
The move imposed limits on the ability to upload videos or photos on social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and its platforms Instagram and Whatsapp.
The curbs had been criticized by opposition figures as being authoritarian.
Pangerapan said the government planned to tighten existing regulations to combat online hoaxes.
"We will make it an obligation for all social media platforms to actively remove hoaxes and fake news," he said.
At the same news conference, police said that a video that has gone viral showing police beating a man in Jakarta during the unrest was genuine, but said claims that he had died were false and said he had been arrested for helping instigate riots.
Writing by Ed Davies; Editing by Nick Macfie
Southeast Asia
Indonesia election: Prabowo disputes quick count results to claim victory over Jokowi
While independent pollsters suggest incumbent president Joko Widodo is leading his challenger by 8 to 9 percentage points, Prabowo Subianto says he has won 62 per cent of the vote
Jokowi has not acknowledged his likely win, instead telling supporters to be patient and wait for official results
Indonesia election: Joko Widodo's latest challenge may come from people refusing to vote
Sign in/up
Politics
Indonesian election: What to expect in Joko Widodo's second presidential term
Joko Widodo has indicated he will focus on human development in his second and final five years as president
He is also likely to continue launching more infrastructure projects, including joint ventures with China
Indonesia election: why Prabowo Subianto is maintaining victory despite a likely win for Jokowi
Sign in/up
Indonesia In 2019 - Coping With A Post-Election Year
Date:
Thursday, May 16, 2019 I 8:00 AM - 12:00 PM
Locatoin:
Summary Agenda Speakers Venue
2019 is going to be a defining year for Indonesia. Post-election, how will the economic outlook, political landscape and credit overview of the various sectors in Indonesia look?
Join S&P Global Ratings and S&P Global Market Intelligence for a morning seminar where our analysts and guest speakers will be sharing deeper insights and analysis on the credit overview.
Mr. Matthew Batrouney, Head of South & South-East Asia, S&P Global Ratings
9:05 am
Mr. Vincent Conti, Economist, Southeast Asia, S&P Global Ratings
9:30 am
Mr. Andrew Wood, Director, Sovereign & International Public Finance Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
9:45 am
Mr. Ivan Tan, Director, Financial Institutions Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
10:00 am
Mr. Xavier Jean, Senior Director, Corporates Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
10:15 am
Indonesia Credit Risk Trends In 2019, Pre-and Post-Election
Mr. Paul Bishop, Director, Credit Risk Solutions, S&P Global Market Intelligence
10:35 am
Panel Discussion: Indonesia In 2019 - Coping With A Post-Election Year Panelists TBC
11:15 am
Paul Bishop S&P Global Market Intelligence
Paul Bishop Director, Credit Analytics, S&P Global Market Intelligence
Paul Bishop is the Product Lead for Credit Analytics in S&P Global Market Intelligence's Asia Pacific Risk Services team, based in Singapore.  Full Bio
Paul Bishop is the Product Lead for Credit Analytics in S&P Global Market Intelligence's Asia Pacific Risk Services team, based in Singapore. He is responsible for Credit Analytics Product business across Asia Pacific. Paul has experience as a product manager in the credit and counterparty risk space and was previously Product Manager - Ratings & Credit Content in EMEA, based in London. Prior to this Paul focused on EMEA product strategy covering Investment & Commercial Banks, Private Equity and Credit Markets.
Paul joined S&P Global Market Intelligence in 2011 in London, UK. Paul holds a BA (Hons) in Political Science & International Relations from the University of Birmingham and a CFA IMC.  Minimize
Xavier Jean S&P Global Ratings
Xavier Jean Senior Director, Corporate Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
Xavier joined S&P Global Ratings in 2004. Based in Singapore since 2010, Xavier is the lead analyst for companies in Malaysia and Indonesia.  Full Bio
Xavier joined S&P Global Ratings in 2004. Based in Singapore since 2010, Xavier is the lead analyst for companies in Malaysia and Indonesia. His specific focus is on companies in the mining, oil and gas, chemical and agribusiness sectors within the region. Xavier is also a regular speaker at conferences on credit matters in ASEAN. Before his current role, Xavier was an Associate Director with S&P Global Ratings' Risk Solutions team in London, where he developed credit risk assessment models of obligors in the chemicals, metals & mining and oil and gas-related industries.  Minimize
Ivan Tan Director, Financial Institutions Ratings, S&P Global Ratings
 
http://str.sg/oVCz
Copy
JAKARTA (REUTERS) - Indonesian presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto is to challenge the official election result in the Constitutional Court, campaign team official Sufmi Dasco said on Tuesday (May 21).
Mr Prabowo lost last month's presidential election to incumbent President Joko Widodo, who secured 55.5 per cent of the public vote, the election commission's official count showed earlier on Tuesday.
The result released by the General Election Commission (KPU) confirms unofficial counts by private pollsters that showed Mr Joko winning the election. 
Mr Prabowo, a retired general, has steadfastly refused to concede defeat after claiming widespread cheating.
"We decided the number two (Prabowo) ticket will lodge a lawsuit with the Constitutional Court," Mr Sufmi, the legal director of  Prabowo's campaign team, told reporters. 
Earlier, a witness for the team and the leading opposition party refused to sign and validate the official results, announced more than a day earlier than expected, after the agency worked into the early hours of Tuesday. 
"We won't give up in the face of this injustice, cheating, lies, and these actions against democracy," said Mr Azis Subekti, the witness. 
 
25 Photos
In Focus
Yesterday in Jakarta, after it was announced that incumbent President Joko Widodo had been reelected as president of Indonesia, beating former General Prabowo Subianto by 11 percentage points, Subianto's supporters took to the streets. Protesters made claims of widespread cheating, and clashed with riot police in several locations in Jakarta, setting fire to vehicles and buildings. Police reportedly responded with tear gas and rubber bullets, arresting hundreds. After 24 hours of chaos, six people were reported to have died in the protests—the cause of their deaths are under investigation—and more than 200 were listed as injured. Subianto says he plans to contest the election results in court.
Protesters, police clash in second night of post-election protests in Indonesia
Agustinus Bea Da Costa
Published: May 22 at 5:19 a.m.
Updated: May 22 at 5:32 p.m.
By Kanupriya Kapoor and Tommy Ardiansyah
JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesian police fired water cannon and rubber bullets at protesters setting fires and trying to breach barbed wire barricades on Wednesday as demonstrations over the outcome of the presidential election hit the capital for a second night.
The riots followed an announcement on Tuesday by the General Election Commission (KPU) confirming that President Joko Widodo had beaten his challenger, former general Prabowo Subianto, in the April 17 poll.
Widodo won more than 85 million votes of 154 million cast, but retired general Prabowo has alleged "massive cheating and irregularities" and refused to concede defeat.
The election supervisory agency dismissed claims of systematic cheating, citing a lack of evidence. Independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Protesters gathered outside the election supervisory agency in central Jakarta. Some arriving carried wooden poles and some had smeared toothpaste around their eyes, a practice commonly carried out to eliminate the effects of tear gas.
Many left peacefully but as night fell others hurled firecrackers and other objects at officers and set blazes as they tried to breach the barbed wire separating them from police.
Police responded with rounds of tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannon.
Medics were seen treating dozens of protesters affected by tear gas and using oxygen to revive some who had passed out.
On Tuesday, the Tanah Abang area had also seen protests turn violent after nightfall. Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan said by Wednesday morning six people had been killed and 200 wounded.
Widodo warned of tough action against those instigating riots.
"I will not tolerate anyone disrupting the security ... or those who disrupt the democratic process or the unity of the country," he told a briefing at the presidential palace.
Chief security minister Wiranto said the government would  temporarily block certain social media functions to prevent inflammatory hoaxes and fake news.
Indonesian authorities say 40,000 police and army personnel are on duty across Jakarta to maintain security. Many office buildings, businesses and embassies in downtown Jakarta were closed, as were train stations in the area.
"WE KNOW WHO IS BEHIND THIS"
Police said at three locations in the capital 257 suspects had been detained who were suspected of starting riots.
Prabowo called for peaceful protests and restraint.
"I urge all sides, the people who are expressing their aspirations, the police, the military and all sides to refrain from physical abuse," he told a briefing.
Many of the protesters appeared to have come from outside Jakarta and police found envelopes containing money on some of the people they searched, national police spokesman Muhamad Iqbal told a news conference.
"This is not a spontaneous incident, this is something by design. There are indications that the mobs are paid and bent on causing chaos," he said.
Later at a news conference, police displayed suspects in orange jumpsuits as well as petrol bombs, makeshift arrows, sickles and cash in envelopes.
The KPU on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters that gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for Prabowo.
A Prabowo campaign official said they planned to contest the result in the Constitutional Court on Thursday. Prabowo also launched a legal challenge after he was defeated in the 2014 election by Widodo, which was unsuccessful.
Analysts have said Widodo's double-digit margin of victory means the opposition does not have a strong case to claim rigging, but Islamist supporters of Prabowo could cause considerable disruption.
Islamist groups, many of which support Prabowo, have in the past been able to mobilize mass support.
From late 2016, they organized a series of protests against then-Jakarta governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the first ethnic-Chinese Christian to hold the job, who was subsequently jailed for insulting the Koran.
Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko said he believed there was "a systematic effort by a certain group ... that is riding on the situation to muddy the situation".
"We know who is behind this," he said.
Of the six reported fatalities, a 30-year-old man was killed due to a blunt force trauma, said Dr. Sumariyono at the Cipto Mangunkusumo hospital in Jakarta. Another man died of bullet wounds, news website Tirto.com reported, quoting a doctor at another hospital.
National police chief Tito Karnavian said reports of the deaths were being investigated. Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said security forces, including military personnel, were not armed with live bullets.
(Additional reporting by Wilda Asmarini, Kanupriya Kapoor, Agustinus Beo Da Costa, Gayatri Suroyo, Fransiska Nangoy, Ed Davies, Fanny Potkin; Writing by John Chalmers and Ed Davies; Editing by Alison Williams)
More World stories
0:56
Six killed as Indonesia protests turn deadly – video
Six people died and more than 200 were injured in the Indonesian capital Jakarta after protesters clashed with security forces and set fire to a police dormitory and vehicles, officials have said.
Protests by supporters of an unsuccessful presidential candidate that had ended peacefully on Tuesday afternoon resumed and turned violent late on Tuesday and continued through the night, said the national police spokesman, Dedi Prasetyo. Police said they had arrested 20 "provocateurs".
Several thousand demonstrators gathered to protest the results , in an area that was in a total security lockdown. Central Jakarta, usually bustling and full of traffic was eerily quiet by the evening.
Behind reams of barbed wire that separated protesters from a heavy military and police presence, some demonstrators held flowers and signs highlighting the deaths of rioters earlier today.
The Jakarta governor, Anies Baswedan, said hospitals were conducting postmortems to determine the causes of the deaths.
Authorities were still investigating and were not willing to rule out the involvement of "third-party provocateurs", said another police official.
Jakarta has been on edge in recent days amid simmering tensions in the aftermath of April's presidential election. Official results on Tuesday confirmed the incumbent, President Joko Widodo , had won a second term with 55.5% of the vote.
His opponent, the fiery ex-special forces commander Prabowo Subianto, has refused to accept the result, alleging the poll was marred by widespread fraud – a claim his team has yet to produce compelling evidence to support.
Indonesian troops on alert as Widodo wins more than half of votes
Read more
Indonesia's security minister, Wiranto, said authorities would restrict access to social media in certain areas to prevent the spread of fake news.
In a press conference this afternoon, Prabowo Subianto denounced the clashes and urged his supporters to protest peacefully.
"We are peaceful, not treasonous," said Rusli, a 46-year-old Jakarta resident, and Prabowo supporter who attended the rally, "The voting data has been manipulated and our the rights of our voices has been diminished. We want justice."
Indonesia's Kompas TV showed protesters throwing rocks, a paramilitary police dormitory on fire, and hundreds of riot police in a central Jakarta neighbourhood. One man reportedly died after sustaining a gunshot wound in the melee, according to Tirto. id , an Indonesian news website.
Prasetyo said police were checking on reports of casualties, but stressed that security officers on the ground, which include military personnel, were not equipped with live bullets.
A police spokesman said police used teargas and water cannon against protesters who threw rocks, molotov cocktails and burning projectiles.
Protesters, police clash in second night of post-election protests in Indonesia
Agustinus Bea Da Costa
Published: May 22 at 5:19 a.m.
Updated: May 22 at 5:32 p.m.
By Kanupriya Kapoor and Tommy Ardiansyah
JAKARTA (Reuters) - Indonesian police fired water cannon and rubber bullets at protesters setting fires and trying to breach barbed wire barricades on Wednesday as demonstrations over the outcome of the presidential election hit the capital for a second night.
The riots followed an announcement on Tuesday by the General Election Commission (KPU) confirming that President Joko Widodo had beaten his challenger, former general Prabowo Subianto, in the April 17 poll.
Widodo won more than 85 million votes of 154 million cast, but retired general Prabowo has alleged "massive cheating and irregularities" and refused to concede defeat.
The election supervisory agency dismissed claims of systematic cheating, citing a lack of evidence. Independent observers have said the poll was free and fair.
Protesters gathered outside the election supervisory agency in central Jakarta. Some arriving carried wooden poles and some had smeared toothpaste around their eyes, a practice commonly carried out to eliminate the effects of tear gas.
Many left peacefully but as night fell others hurled firecrackers and other objects at officers and set blazes as they tried to breach the barbed wire separating them from police.
Police responded with rounds of tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannon.
Medics were seen treating dozens of protesters affected by tear gas and using oxygen to revive some who had passed out.
On Tuesday, the Tanah Abang area had also seen protests turn violent after nightfall. Jakarta Governor Anies Baswedan said by Wednesday morning six people had been killed and 200 wounded.
Widodo warned of tough action against those instigating riots.
"I will not tolerate anyone disrupting the security ... or those who disrupt the democratic process or the unity of the country," he told a briefing at the presidential palace.
Chief security minister Wiranto said the government would  temporarily block certain social media functions to prevent inflammatory hoaxes and fake news.
Indonesian authorities say 40,000 police and army personnel are on duty across Jakarta to maintain security. Many office buildings, businesses and embassies in downtown Jakarta were closed, as were train stations in the area.
"WE KNOW WHO IS BEHIND THIS"
Police said at three locations in the capital 257 suspects had been detained who were suspected of starting riots.
Prabowo called for peaceful protests and restraint.
"I urge all sides, the people who are expressing their aspirations, the police, the military and all sides to refrain from physical abuse," he told a briefing.
Many of the protesters appeared to have come from outside Jakarta and police found envelopes containing money on some of the people they searched, national police spokesman Muhamad Iqbal told a news conference.
"This is not a spontaneous incident, this is something by design. There are indications that the mobs are paid and bent on causing chaos," he said.
Later at a news conference, police displayed suspects in orange jumpsuits as well as petrol bombs, makeshift arrows, sickles and cash in envelopes.
The KPU on Tuesday confirmed unofficial counts by private pollsters that gave Widodo a 55.5% share of votes against 44.5% for Prabowo.
A Prabowo campaign official said they planned to contest the result in the Constitutional Court on Thursday. Prabowo also launched a legal challenge after he was defeated in the 2014 election by Widodo, which was unsuccessful.
Analysts have said Widodo's double-digit margin of victory means the opposition does not have a strong case to claim rigging, but Islamist supporters of Prabowo could cause considerable disruption.
Islamist groups, many of which support Prabowo, have in the past been able to mobilize mass support.
From late 2016, they organized a series of protests against then-Jakarta governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, the first ethnic-Chinese Christian to hold the job, who was subsequently jailed for insulting the Koran.
Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko said he believed there was "a systematic effort by a certain group ... that is riding on the situation to muddy the situation".
"We know who is behind this," he said.
Of the six reported fatalities, a 30-year-old man was killed due to a blunt force trauma, said Dr. Sumariyono at the Cipto Mangunkusumo hospital in Jakarta. Another man died of bullet wounds, news website Tirto.com reported, quoting a doctor at another hospital.
National police chief Tito Karnavian said reports of the deaths were being investigated. Police spokesman Dedi Prasetyo said security forces, including military personnel, were not armed with live bullets.
(Additional reporting by Wilda Asmarini, Kanupriya Kapoor, Agustinus Beo Da Costa, Gayatri Suroyo, Fransiska Nangoy, Ed Davies, Fanny Potkin; Writing by John Chalmers and Ed Davies; Editing by Alison Williams)
More World stories
Listen
Four dead in post-election riot in Indonesia's Papua
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said.
More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district.
The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name.
The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said.
More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district.
The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name.
The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
Latest News
Listen
Four dead in post-election riot in Indonesia's Papua
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said. More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district. The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name. The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
JAKARTA: A 16-year-old boy was one of at least four people shot dead by police during a riot triggered by dissatisfaction over the election result in the restive province of Papua, an official said. More than 300 supporters of a legislative candidate who claimed he should have won the seat in the local council attacked a district office in Asmat district. The candidate, who was not identified, claimed based on the votes he should have won a seat in the city council but his name was replaced with another candidate's name. The protesters, armed with sharp weapons, damaged the district office, local military spokesman Muhammed Aidi said.
Latest News
Jakarta riot violations under spotlight
Rights groups set up complaint centers to log allegations of targeted violence, torture during post-election unrest
Police face off against protesters outside the election commission building in Jakarta on May 21. Three right groups in Jakarta have opened complaint centers to log alleged violations during post-election riots in the Indonesian capital May 21-22. (Photo by Konradus Epa/ucanews.com)
Indonesia
May 28, 2019
Three Indonesian rights organizations have set up a center where victims of alleged targeted and excessive violence during rioting in Jakarta last week can file complaints.
Two days of rioting by supporters of defeated presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto rocked the capital on May 21-22 after the election commission officially announced President Joko Widodo had won a second term following presidential elections in April.
At least eight people were killed and more than 700 injured during the unrest.
According to the Commission for Missing Persons and Victims of Violence (KontraS), the Jakarta Legal Aid Institute (LBH Jakarta) and the Legal Aid Institute for the Press (LBH Pers) there were at least 14 incidents of targeted violence during the riots, including attacks on journalists.
"Based on this, we have open complaint centers for those who may of fallen victim to shootings, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture or rights violations during the riots," Yati Andriyani, coordinator of KontraS, said on May 27.
She said complaints can be filed in person or online and that any relevant evidence should be provided.
Ahmad Fatanah, from LBH Pers said the centers would be open for about a week.
"After that, all the complaints will be presented to the National Commission on Human Rights (Komnas HAM) for further investigation," he told ucanews.com.
Referring to the reported violence against journalists , he said at least 20 journalists were subjected to acts of intimidation and attacks.
Of that number, according to the Alliance of Independent Journalists, rioters committed seven incidents, while police were allegedly responsible for 11 others. Two further cases were still being verified, Fatanah said.
Azas Tigor Nainggolan, coordinator of the human rights desk at the Indonesian bishops' Commission for Justice, Peace and Pastoral for Migrant-Itinerant People, welcomed the NGOs' move. 
"The Church supports good enforcement of the law and the protection of human rights," he told ucanews.com.
He said with or without such complaint centers, an investigation must be conducted.
"The government must work with Komnas HAM and look into human rights violations committed by police personnel. This must be done to deter any future occurrences," he said.
A video showing an unarmed man being repeatedly beaten with sticks by police went viral after the riots. The National Police confirmed the incident had taken place and said the man had supplied rocks to rioters.
Sign up to receive UCAN Daily Full Bulletin
Thank you. You are now                    signed up to our Daily Full                    Bulletin newsletter
Komnas HAM has formed a special team to conduct an investigation into human rights violations that occurred during the riots and will soon meet with the National Police.
Related Reports
Post-Election, Indonesian President Expected to Go Soft on China Despite Maritime Flaps
share
Print
TAIPEI — 
Indonesian President Joko Widodo is expected to warm toward China in his second term in search of infrastructure funding instead of challenging Chinese sovereignty in a fishery-rich sea between them.
The leader who since 2014 has emphasized domestic issues in Asia's third largest country rather than foreign policy initiatives will probably build up Indonesia's status as a node in China's $1 trillion-plus Belt and Road Initiative, scholars who know the country say. The 6-year-old initiative is aimed at opening trade routes around Eurasia via infrastructure projects.
Indonesia's government will repel any Chinese vessels from waters it claims near the Natuna Islands, experts say, but otherwise avoid confronting the militarily stronger China over maritime sovereignty. The president, often known by his hybridized name Jokowi, won a second five-year term April 17.
"Although Jokowi sought to downplay Chinese-funded projects in recent elections, he is likely to continue the current stance of attracting Chinese capital for infrastructure development while reinforcing defenses around the Natuna islands against Chinese encroachments and illegal fishing," said Mohan Malik, a professor in Asian security with the Daniel K. Inouye Asia Pacific Center for Security Studies in the United States.
Stable Sino-Indonesian relations would advance Beijing's goal of keeping Western-aligned powers out of the South China Sea dispute, possibly in Indonesia's defense, while ensuring that the impoverished archipelago of some 13,000 islands gets vital infrastructure support.
No compromise on the Natuna Islands
Widodo's next five years as president are expected overall to extend his maritime policies since 2016. Widodo parted ways around then with five predecessors by trying to shape Indonesia as a maritime power, according to published research by the East-West Center think tank in Honolulu. It says he sought to turn Indonesia into a "two-ocean, Indo-Pacific power" in view of the archipelago's expanse.
China claims most of the 3.5 million-square-kilometer South China Sea that reaches from the Natuna chain to the Chinese mainland. China doesn't claim the tiny Natuna islets, but in 2016 its foreign ministry cited historic rights for its fishing boats to use nearby waters.
Indonesian authorities have burned dozens of foreign fishing boats, and last year the country opened a base in the Natuna Islands with a hangar for drones and up to 1,000 personnel who could be trained for any kind of operation.
"Back then, Jokowi basically said you need to guard Indonesia's status as a maritime power," said Alan Chong, associate professor at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore, referring to Widodo's first term. The base, he said, "is in line, very clearly in line, with that."
Also last year, Indonesia renamed part of the disputed ocean tract the North Natuna Sea, drawing an angry response from China.
China might look for natural gas deposits in the contested waters, said Carl Thayer, emeritus professor at the University of New South Wales in Australia. But if Indonesia just repels individual Chinese vessels without making a political scene, he said, it's harder for China to initiate any trouble.
"Unless there's provocation or an incident that comes up, Indonesia basically won't react too much to the matter of those islands," said Tai Wan-ping, Southeast Asia-specialized international business professor at Cheng Shiu University in Taiwan. "They might make a verbal response but not military action."
Capital from China
Indonesia's reliance on China for help developing infrastructure will temper ambitions to stand up for the Natuna waters, some analysts believe.
Widodo's comments on foreign relations are aimed at courting Chinese development help rather than in taking a stand on "issues such as the South China Sea crisis," writer Nithin Coca said in a report for the Lowy Institute for International Policy in Australia.
Indonesia was once "more cautious in its approach" to the Belt and Road, "conscious of ensuring that investments bring real benefits to the nation while minimizing any negative effects," Jakarta-based investment research and advisory institute Tenggara Strategics said last year in a research paper.
In August, Widodo told the Indonesian People's Consultative Assembly his government would focus on "acceleration of infrastructure development" to catch up with other countries and create new economic centers in the country.
China has already offered billions of U.S. dollars to Indonesia for infrastructure such as a railway line on the main island Java. Too much could irritate Indonesians who already resent China so much that they rioted in the 1960s against ethnic Chinese in their country.
"He wants the ports through the archipelago to be modernized and the sea lanes to become the really major safe transit route, and so getting extra crumbs or not so much crumbs, half a loaf of bread, from China would be to his advantage, but I think there also is an underlying anti-China sentiment in Indonesia," Thayer said.
Related
Indonesian Police: 4 Top Officials Target of Failed Assassination Plot
share
Print
Indonesian police say four top government officials were the targets of an assassination plot that may have been linked to last week's deadly post-presidential riots in Jakarta.
National police chief Tito Karnavian told reporters Tuesday the intended victims of the plot were chief security minister Wiranto who uses just one name, intelligence agency chief Budi Gunawan, maritime affairs minister Luhut Pandjaitan, and Gories Mere, a special adviser to President Joko Widodo. Karnavian said the identities of the targets were revealed after six people were arrested on Monday in connection with the plot.
Wiranto, who appeared at the press conference with Karnavian, said the plot was intended to "create fear."
At least eight people were killed and hundreds injured during two nights of clashes in the Indonesian capital between security forces and supporters of presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto, a former special forces general who was soundly defeated by President Widodo in the April 17 vote. Security officials say they believe the protests, which began after Widodo was officially declared the winner, were organized by several groups, including hardline Islamic militants.
Prabowo has refused to concede the election, alleging massive fraud and irregularities while providing no evidence, and challenged the result in the Constitutional Court.
VOA News
Unlimited access to washingtonpost.com on any device
Unlimited access to all Washington Post apps
No on-site advertising or third-party ad tracking
Please enable cookies on your web browser in order to continue.
The new European data protection law requires us to inform you of the following before you use our website:
We use cookies and other technologies to customize your experience, perform analytics and deliver personalized advertising on our sites, apps and newsletters and across the Internet based on your interests. By clicking "I agree" below, you consent to the use by us and our third-party partners of cookies and data gathered from your use of our platforms. See our Privacy Policy and Third Party Partners to learn more about the use of data and your rights. You also agree to our Terms of Service .
I agree
Indonesian police arrest six over assassination plot during Jakarta unrest
Indonesian anti-riot police take their position to disperse the mob during an overnight-violent demonstration near by the Elections Oversight Body (Bawaslu) in Jakarta on May 22, 2019.
PHOTO: AFP
South China Morning Post
